 Salon.com Mobile - Are we dangerously dependent on Wikipedia?

  Salon.com Mobile Back Home |  Full Version   This letter is associated with the following article:   Are we dangerously dependent on Wikipedia?   The author of a new book says no, and talks about how a site spawned by an Ayn Rand enthusiast became our most popular encyclopedia.  By Vincent Rossmeier   Read The Article  Post a letter about this article  Read other letters about this article  ET Facts vs. Wisdom Wikipedia is great for what it is: an encyclopedia. As studies have shown (and as the LW above demonstrated with the Stalingrad article), Wiki is on par with any of the print encyclopedias. But encyclopedias are never intended to be a primary source. Wikipedia takes pains to point that fact out. If college students and others are becoming too reliant on Wiki as a primary source, the fault is not with Wikipedia. In the pre-wiki days, any college student who turned in a paper citing Britannica as a primary source would promptly (and rightly)get an F on that paper. BUT, the professor would not have blamed Britannica. S/he would blame the lazy student. Nothing fundamental has changed, other than the source. Proper use of any encyclopedia in an academic setting is to get a high level overview of a topic as a guide, and then move on to cited primary sources. For non-academics, say, fiction writers or just casual info junkies, Wiki is invaluable. If I need to know when a certaim Simpsons episode aired, or on what album a song was first included, or who was the secretary of the navy under Millard Fillmore, Wiki is the place to go. As long as you remember that accumulated facts does not equal accumulated wisdom, Wikipedia is a perfectly usefull and valid tool  —Brian Schlosser  Read Brian Schlosser's other letters  Permalink  Flag   Click "Submit Flag" if you feel this post is inappropriate. Explain why below if you wish.   Cancel      Read other letters about this article     Home |  Full Version |  About Salon |  Contact & Help  Copyright © 2011 Salon Media Group, Inc. Reproduction of material from any Salon pages without written permission is strictly prohibited. SALON® is registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office as a trademark of Salon Media Group Inc.  
