 China Virtual Tour - Lesson Plan: China's One Child Policy

                                                China's 'One Child Policy'      Learning areas Studies of society and environment  In relation to  Studies of Society and Environment - a Curriculum Profile for Australian Schools , this lesson plan can contribute to the following strands: Time, continuity and change; Culture; Natural and social systems.    Level Years 7-8    Outline Students use an extract from Beth Gilligan's   Voices and Values: Citizenship in Asia  (Curriculum Corporation, 1998, pp 29-30), together with other resources, as the basis for investigation and analysis of China's 'one child policy'.    Studies of Asia emphases Major emphasis:  Being informed about contemporary issues    Curriculum context These activities would complement student work about other aspects of citizenship in Australia and elsewhere. They would also be useful when dealing with issues of global population growth or issues of social control in Australia and elsewhere.    Duration Several class sessions, plus time for student research and extension activities.    Materials required Students require access to copies of the extract ' One Child Policy '. They could read it on screen or from printed copies.    Procedure   Ask students to summarise the reasons given for the One Child Policy.   Discuss students' opinions about the policy. Ask for suggestions about arguments against it. Arrange for students to make a display of the various arguments in the classroom.   Ask students to use the Internet or other resources to find other opinions about the policy. Add new ideas to the classroom display.   Organise students to work in small groups to design a national television advertisement to explain the reasons for the policy to the community.  Extension: If possible, use video equipment to film advertisements. Have the finished work shown to another class for an assessment of its merits.      Arrange for students to role play a situation in which two neighbours (rural or urban) have just found out about the policy and discuss it.  Extension: Introduce the role of a Chinese official. Hold a meeting in which the official interacts with the neighbours.   Ask students to prepare a written argument which assesses the value of a One Child Policy in China and in other countries such as Australia.     China Lesson Plan Catalogue      Access Asia Lesson Plans       Curriculum Corporation and the Asialink Centre, The University of Melbourne.        
