 Former governor Mark Warner addresses Class of 2006

    << Back    13 May 2006     Former governor Mark Warner addresses Class of 2006      View the Photo Album  Former Governor Mark Warner     Longwood University graduates  were told Saturday (May 13) to not be afraid to fail, to be civil in political discourse and to remember their family and friends. “The diplomas that you will receive are, by all statistical measures, tickets to a better  life,” said former governor Mark Warner. “I know that when I became the first in my family to graduate college, I would be able to do things and go places that my parents only dreamed of. But there is a price for this ticket – and I don’t mean the interest in the student loans. The price of this unparalleled opportunity is the responsibilities that come with this world-class education. “First, there is an obligation that we ask you to keep with yourselves, and that’s: don’t be afraid to fail. Second, there is a responsibility you have to the community – a basic obligation that all who live here have, but, unfortunately, too few take seriously. And that’s to conduct our political debates in a civil and respectful manner. My final piece of advice is perhaps the most important lesson that I can leave you with today. Call your mother. Call your father. Call your grandparents, girlfriends, boyfriends, husbands and wives. And I say that not just because I was in the cellphone business. I say that because if you’re going to be honest with yourself you didn’t get here alone.”  From left: John Adams, rector of the Longwood Board of Visitors; former governor Mark Warner; and Longwood President Patricia Cormier.    He also told the graduates “No matter how many days and how many miles separate you from your time here in Farmville, never forget what you learned here. Reject the cynicism and shallow posturing that dominate our media. Tune out the shouting and background noise that masquerade as meaningful commentary. Instead, wrestle with the complex issues, be respectful of those with whom you disagree, and always remember that despite our glorious differences, a love of country binds us together – as Americans. “If you remember nothing else I say today, remember this: No one –  no one – in politics has a monopoly on virtue, on patriotism, or, most importantly, on the truth. And that goes for conservatives and liberals – and everyone in between.” Warner, governor from 2002 until this January, received an  honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree . Some 770 bachelor’s and 164 master’s degrees were awarded to graduates who completed their degree requirements this May, last December and last August.  Bottom, from left: student award winners Sonya Stowe, Kristen Casalenuovo and Kaitlin Aardahl. Top, from left: faculty award winners Dr. Melissa Rhoten, Dr. Alix Fink and Dr. Jennifer Apperson.     The Sally Barksdale Hargrett Prize for Academic Excellence, given to the graduating senior with the highest grade-point average, went to Kaitlin Marie Aardahl of Virginia Beach (B.S., liberal studies), and Sonya Evelyn Stowe of Dry Fork (B.A., modern languages). Each had a perfect 4.0 GPA. Kristen Casalenuovo of Appomattox (B.S., physics), received the Dan Daniel Senior Award for Scholarship and Citizenship.  Among the graduates was a set of triplets, Abby, Bonnie and Courtney Jones of Arrington in Nelson County. Bonnie and Courtney received a B.A. in communication studies, Abby a B.S. in community health education. Their late mother, Mary Frances Wood Jones, also was a Longwood graduate (’76), as is their sister, Jessica Jones (’03). Former NBA player Jerome Kersey before the ceremony.    Another graduate who participated in the ceremony was Jerome Kersey, who enjoyed a 17-year NBA career, mostly with the Portland Trailblazers, after attending Longwood from 1980-84, during which he was a first team Division II All-American his senior year. Kersey, a Clarksville native who now lives in Happy Valley, Ore., Portland suburb, received a B.S. in social work after completing the two courses he needed.  “When I talked with Jerome at the Longwood Hall of Fame induction ceremony (last Nov. 27),” said Dr. Wayne McWee, vice president for academic affairs, “he told me that he wanted to graduate so that his daughter could be proud of her dad for graduating from college. He worked with Dr. Charles Ross (dean of the College of Arts and Sciences) and Dr. Theresa Clark (associate professor of social work).” William J. “Bill” Gouldin Jr., president and CEO of Strange’s Florists, Greenhouses & Garden Centers, also graduated, although he didn’t attend the ceremony. Gouldin, of Rockville, Va., a member of the Corporate Advisory Board in the College of Business & Economics, received a B.S. in business administration with a concentration in management. He has been working for about a year and a half to complete his degree requirements.  Mrs. Louise Clifton Walton Morris (left) was recognized as the first graduate to receive a master's degree from Longwood in 1956. Mrs. Morris was an honored guest at a reception held for the 164 master's graduates in the Class of 2006. Graduates were given a special medallion commemorating he 50th anniversary of graduate studies at Longwood by Dean Sue McCullough (right). Mrs. Morris was an elementary teacher in the Lynchburg and Hampton schools for nearly 30 years and currently resides in Hampton, VA.    “I’ve been a student everywhere,” he said with a laugh. “I attended Virginia Tech for almost two years beginning in 1966, then went in the Army, and while still in the Army and stationed at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, I attended night school at the University of Oklahoma and Cameron University, and when I got out of the service in 1971 I went to night school at the University of Richmond.”  Dr. Melissa Rhoten, assistant professor of chemistry, received the Maria Bristow Starke Faculty Excellence Award; Dr. Alix Fink, assistant professor of biology, the Junior Faculty Award; and Dr. Jennifer Apperson, associate professor and chair of the Department of Psychology, the Student-Faculty Recognition Award. Related Links:  Commencement Photo Album Full transcript of Mark Warner's Address Full text of Honorary Degree      Return to Longwood News          
