 NVTC Chairman John Backus and President Bobbie Kilberg Applaud Governor Mark Warner's... -- re> HERNDON, Va., April 5 /PRNewswire/ --

     See more news releases in:  Transportation, Trucking & Railroad ,  Computer Electronics ,  Computer Software ,  Multimedia & Internet            NVTC Chairman John Backus and President Bobbie Kilberg Applaud Governor Mark Warner's Proposal to Allow Northern Virginia Referendum for Transportation               Download image      
    HERNDON, Va., April 5 /PRNewswire/ -- NVTC Chairman John Backus and
 President Bobbie Kilberg released the following statement regarding the
 Governor's announcement today that he is amending SB 668 to include a regional
 sales tax referendum for Northern Virginia to begin addressing our region's
 critical transportation funding needs.
     (Photo:   http://www.newscom.com/cgi-bin/prnh/20011017/NVTCLOGO  )
 
     "The Northern Virginia Technology Council applauds Governor Warner for his
 leadership in seeking to allow the citizens of Northern Virginia to vote on an
 issue that is so important to our everyday lives," said John Backus.  "We
 expect that Northern Virginia's legislative delegation will join with
 legislators across the state in bipartisan support of the Governor's
 referendum proposal when the General Assembly convenes for its veto session.
 The people of this region deserve the right to choose to meaningfully address
 our transportation funding shortfalls."
     "A regional sales tax referendum is vital if Northern Virginia is ever
 going to generate the revenues necessary to allow many regional transportation
 and mass transit solutions to move forward," said Bobbie Kilberg.  "Northern
 Virginia's technology industry will continue to work with the Governor, the
 Speaker and the General Assembly to garner passage of this referendum proposal
 on April 17."
 
     About NVTC
     The Northern Virginia Technology Council (NVTC) is the membership
 association for the technology community in Northern Virginia.  NVTC has more
 than 1700 member companies representing over 190,000 employees.  Our
 membership includes companies from all sectors of the technology industry
 including information technology, software, Internet, ISPs, ASPs,
 telecommunications, bioscience, and aerospace, as well as the service
 providers that support these companies.  NVTC provides its members with: (1)
 over 150 networking and educational events per year; (2) comprehensive member
 benefit services, (3) public policy advocacy on a broad range of technology
 issues at the state and regional levels, with involvement in federal issues as
 they relate to workforce and education concerns; and (4) community service
 opportunities through active involvement in community projects and
 philanthropy through the NVTC Foundation.
 
                     MAKE YOUR OPINION COUNT -  Click Here
                 http://tbutton.prnewswire.com/prn/11690X49942897 
 
   SOURCE  Northern Virginia Technology Council

  Back to top     Next in Transportation, Trucking & Railroad News   Custom Packages Browse our custom packages or build your own to meet your unique communications needs. Start today.     PR Newswire Membership Fill out a PR Newswire membership form or contact us at (888) 776-0942.  Learn about PR Newswire services Request more information about PR Newswire products and services or call us at (888) 776-0942.       My News   Featured Video      Print  Email    RSS  Share it          Google                                                       Blog it                        WordPress Blog URL:                      Blog Search                  More in These Categories Transportation, Trucking & Railroad  Toyota & Entravision Communications Corporation Host "Camry for a Better Commute" Concert Featuring Julieta Venegas and Belanova   Michelin Suggests Easy Way to Increase Driving Safety   Black Consumers not Courted by Current Hybrid and EV Manufacturers, Reports Mintel     Federal & State Legislation  National Public Safety Organizations and Wireless Industry Respond to FCC Report on 9-1-1 Fund Diversion   ComEd Customer Bills Expected to Decline in June   Multiple States and Vendors Agree on Standard Health Data Connectivity Specifications     Most Read  Nov 03, 2011, 08:15 ET  Eon Productions, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios and Sony Pictures Entertainment Announce 7th November Is Start of Production for 23rd James Bond Film "SKYFALL"  May 13, 2006, 01:00 ET  Xinhua Finance CEO Ms. Fredy Bush Awarded Ellis Island Medal of Honor  Nov 07, 2011, 09:18 ET  LegalShield Announces 2011 WOW Service Awards   View all   Most Emailed  Oct 04, 2011, 15:58 ET  Anti-Bully Ambassadors, Casey and Bella, Launch Free Bully Prevention Resources and Anti-Bully Curriculum for Schools  Nov 03, 2011, 08:00 ET  Chobani® to Invest Over $100 Million to Open New Facility in Idaho  Oct 31, 2011, 17:37 ET  Radio Host Michael Baisden Invests in Small Businesses with 'Million Dollar Business Pitch' Campaign   View all       Journalists and Bloggers  Visit   PR Newswire for Journalists  for releases, photos, ProfNet experts, and customized feeds just for Media. View and download archived video  content distributed by MultiVu on   The Digital Center  . Free Investing Newsletter from Investor Uprising!  Learn to navigate the world's financial system and profit from leading companies.      Register for   Investor Uprising  , the people's investment site, for a free weekly newsletter, information, education and premium research including our latest IU Confidential Report - "  All The Glitters: The Ultimate Gold Report  ".        Advanced Search Search        Products & Services       News Releases        Close                     Send a release   Member sign in   Become a member   For journalists   For bloggers   Global sites       Products & Services  Knowledge Center  Browse News Releases  Contact PR Newswire     About PR Newswire  Contact PR Newswire  PR Newswire's Terms of Use Apply  Careers  Privacy  Site Map  RSS Feeds  Blog   Copyright © 2011 PR Newswire Association LLC. All Rights Reserved. A  UBM plc company. Dynamic Site Platform powered by Limelight Networks.   Become a member  Become a partner  Call us        Request more information  Send us feedback    Online Member Center  MEDIAtlas  Media Monitoring  ProfNet  My News for Investors    Asia  Brazil  Canada  Europe  France  Israel  Mexico  Netherlands  United Kingdom     
