 Natalie Portman: I Gained 20 Lbs at Harvard « www.9u8.org

     www.9u8.org  share news for us!  Hot News    Cinematical Movie Club: Paper Moon     Paris Hilton Out and About (1/8/7)     Duncan Jones on ‘Source Code,’ Jumping Off Trains and ‘Blade Runner’     Michael Jackson’s Family Issues Statement     LEA MICHELE: GLEE STAR LEA MICHELE DOESN’T WANT TO MEET HER HEROES     ‘Dynasty’ Heading to the Big Screen    Latest News    Elisabeth Hasselbeck Slams Hiring of Brad Womack as the Next Bachelor     Kim Kardashian Steps Out in Beret, Bell Bottom Jeans     Lindsay Lohan Arrives Late to First Day of Morgue Duty     Kate Middleton’s Tiara, Jewelry, and More: All the Details     Review | The Eagle     PIC: Angelina, Vivienne Marvel at Early Snowfall    Meta Log in  RSS Feed  Comments RSS      Natalie Portman: I Gained 20 Lbs at Harvard  Celebrity Blog   Natalie Portman loves bucking her goody-goody persona — not just in her dark-as-midnight role in  Black Swan , but in her new production company, Handsomecharlie films. She tells the January issue of  Vogue that she and business partner Annette Savitch want to make raunchy “female comedies” in the vein of  Knocked Up  director Judd Apatow. “Women…are generally not allowed to beautiful and funny, and certainly not vulgar,” Portman, 29, says. PHOTOS: Natalie’s startling make-under The star (who was just nominated for a Golden Globe for  Black Swan ) explains: “There’s a difference between being in a bra and underpants as an object on a men’s-magazine cover and playing yourself–a woman with desires and needs who loves and laughs with her friends–in a bra and underpants.” Portman also draws a strict line between herself and her  Black Swan character, Nina — who is anorexic and generally self-destructive. PHOTOS: The year’s most talked-about bodies “I swear, I eat. I ate a bagel an hour ago,” she tells  Vogue . “I consume my own weight in hummus every day. I cook a lot, and I even do vegan baking.” “I like pleasure, I like joy. I’d never get to the point where I would starve or injure myself like [my character] Nina does. I’m the opposite—when I’m hungry, I eat, and I always make sure I’m eating something delicious.” PHOTOS: Scary skinny bikini bodies Portman says she did struggle with her weight and mental health while attending Harvard University. “I gained my freshman fifteen or 20 and had superdepressed moments,” she says. “That Cambridge winter is tough. It was important to know how to go through that and how to get myself out of it. You start learning how to ask your friends or professionals for help, or go to mentors.”    Angelina Jolie Kills ‘Wanted 2′ So She Can Defy ‘Gravity’     Lily Collins Talks Snow White!     Sean Penn: ‘Ex-Wife is a Ghost to me’     Grab a Front Row Seat to ‘The Last Exorcism’     Robert Pattinson Wanted to Work in Politics     ‘Green Lantern’ Flies Without a Costume    Related Posts    The Greatest Book to Screen Adaptations of all Time     Kim Kardashian Focuses on Work Now That She’s Single     Leonardo DiCaprio Hated Beng a Pretty Boy!     Outside the Jackson Memorial Pictures     Big Stars Hurting Financially – Boo Hoo – Tax Dodging Chris Tucker Faces Loss Of Home     Find Out Kate Gosselin and Bachelor Jake’s Dancing Partners on DWTS!     ‘Freakonomics’ Set to Close Tribeca Film Festival     Jessica Alba to Go Undercover in ‘Spy Kids 4′     Shannen Doherty to Root for Ex-Husband on DWTS     SAG Awards 2011 Winners List: Whom Did the Screen Actors Guild Honor?     ‘The King’s Speech’ Trailer: Is This a Lock for Best Picture?     Robert Pattinson Spotted in London — Without Kristen Stewart!     Author:  www.9u8.org on  November 17, 2011   Category:   News    Newer:  Jennifer Aniston: Prince William Doesn’t Need a Hair Transplant  Older:  25 Most Stylish New Yorkers: Scott Schuman and Garance Dore    Last articles John Mayer Almost Did The Voice!  Denise Richards Finally Opens Up About Charlie Sheen’s Hotel Meltdown  Jennifer Aniston: Prince William Doesn’t Need a Hair Transplant  Natalie Portman: I Gained 20 Lbs at Harvard  25 Most Stylish New Yorkers: Scott Schuman and Garance Dore  Diablo Cody Is Pregnant!  Audrina Patridge: Heidi Has “Changed a Bit”  Should Sandra Take Jesse Back?  Kate Gosselin Spends 35th Birthday Away From Kids  Kendra Wilkinson Writing Autobiography      www.9u8.org  2011.   WikiWP theme, powe red by  Chereshka &  WordPress .   |    RSS  x5y5.com Celebrity Blog       
