 Victims of Pan Am 103 

 The victims of Pan Am 103 A plane crash is a nightmare of your worst expectations coming true.....we all fear crashing with our planes and the fear is both plausible and could happen to all of us at any time - and we cannot do a thing to rescue ourselves once the plane is heading for touchdown. We are helpless victims of fate, unable to act in defense of ourselves. That is why the deaths of 270 people is such terrible news: it could have been us or our families. And even if we hate to admit it: we are happy it wasn't us or our families. To learn from the crash of Pan Am 103 we need to learn about the victims: who were they and why must they and their horrible fate be kept in remembrance?  Overview and quick-menu - press to go to section:  Death toll and causes  Survival chances   Lockerbie - a town in pain   Who are the victims?     Lucky passengers   Syracuse Tragedy   UK Families Flight 103   US victim´s committees     Paying the damage   Individual stories   Arlington and Lockerbie Memorial sites   More victims        Victim hit score They say flying is the safest way to travel. Well this is quite true. Flying doesn't kill you. Crashing does. Logically, it is not safe to crash. The AAIB made a very laconic statement in its technical report about the chance to survive the crash of Pan Am 103: The crash was simply  not survivable . 243 passengers killed. 16 crew members. 11 residents of Lockerbie. A total hit score of 270 persons.  Not every body aboard the plane died from the explosion. 8 passengers did. Or maybe they didn't die from the explosion after all. Maybe they were sucked into engine 3 and vaporated. We simply don't know. The 8 bodies are missing and not accounted for. They were all sitting in rows 23 to 28 in the economy section, just above the blast section.  2 other bodies from aboard the aircraft are not accounted for. 7 Lockerbie residents are missing. They were residents of the Sherwood Crescent area, and they probably became vaporated, when the fuel-loaded wing and center section of the aircraft crashed and exploded.  Cause of death Post mortem pathological examinations of other victims aboard the plane indicated no in-flight fire or other indications of shrapnells from any explosion. No evidence unequivocally indicated any passengers or crew members had been killed or injured from any explosive blast.So what killed them ?  The majority of the people aboard Pan Am 103 died as a result of severe multiple injuries at different stages. In plain english this means they were literally crushed, hit, ripped apart and cut to death. People were killed as the aircraft disintegrated, as it hit ground, and some had been thrown from the aircraft fuselage during integration and at impact.  Most bodies fell in clusters. About 60 victims fell near Lockerbies famous golf course at the towns east end. About 50 bodies landed together with the fuselage in Ellen Ramsdens garden.  Some bodies were found in trees, some inside fragments of the plane, others lying spread-eagled in the mud. Death had reached them quick but violent. Some of the people aboard the aircraft have been conscious about their final fate all the way down.For some of them the fall took almost 2 minutes - the lack of oxygene in the uppe spheres might have let people meet death unconsciously, some might have regained consciousness when falling further down into oxygene-rich atmosphere. 2 bodies could not be identified. 658 bags of human remains are still to be identified.  Only one woman survived the accident. But not for long. Scottish rescue workers found a woman on the ground with a pulse.  But the pulse was gone 10 minutes later. The woman was never conscious, never lived to tell about her experience during those horrible minutes before the crash.    COULD ANYONE HAVE SURVIVED FLIGHT 103? Two passengers aboard Flight 103 may have survived the fall from thirtyone thousand feet, according to a pathologist who testified before a fatal accident inquiry in Dumfries, Scotland.  "The chances are that, even if they had survived, they would have been deeply unconscious after sustaining their injuries,"  said Dr. Anthony Bussuttil.  Bussuttil is a professor of forensic medicine at Edinburgh University who testified before the inquiry on October 17, 1990. Bussuttil told investigators that eight pathologists grouped the victims into three categories:  1) the majority of passengers who most likely died immediately from injuries;  2) a smaller number with less-severe injuries but whose vital organs were extensively damaged, causing immediate death or unconsciousness;  3) and two passengers with less-severe injuries.  "It is possible that this third group may have survived for a short time,"  Bussuttil said.  When asked if one or both might have survived given the "best qualified medical team possible," Bussuttil replied:  "There  is a possibility that, if resuscitation was available immediately with access to hospital facilities, there could have been  survival."  Bussuttil pointed out that, given the plane's altitude when it exploded, the victims' 2-1/2-minute free fall would have reached speeds of about 120 miles per hour. "Some victims may have fallen faster because they were attached to  heavy parts of the aircraft," he explained. "Some may have fallen more slowly because they were with parts of the  aircraft which fluttered down."      Report of Pan Am 103 autopsy in American Science Journal    Other immediate injuries Some Lockerbie citizens were injured as a direct result of the crash. 2 serious injuries and 3 with minor injuries, due to one of the falling engines from the plane, and due to the fire, after impact-explosions. Of course, many more people obviously must have suffered psychical shocks as the aircraft crashed in the middle of their small city. Someone may still be suffering from nightmares, flight-phobia or other mental problems this very day....        The Lockerbie Experience: a town in pain    Carra Brown lost 11 neighbours in Lockerbie  Relatives and friends of Pan Am 103-victims still suffer from stress disorders and depressions today. But right after the crash no one was there to offer professional disaster councelling for the relatives.  Two days after the crash: relatives in state of schock  Lasting pain: what the 103-relatives will never forget  Relatives invited to watch video-sequence of crash 1990  NEW:  Interview with103-relative Susan Cohen about coping with death and terrorism      Who are the victims ? 11 people from Lockerbie were killed as a direct result of the crash.  The victims of Lockerbie  The crew of Pan Am 103 was killed as well.  The crew of Pan Am 103  Pan Am keeps records of their passenger lists years back, on microfilm archieves. Passenger-lists are supposed to be public, as soon as the plane has landed, and passengers loaded off.  Passenger List from Pan Am 103 Pan Am Flight 103 passenger positions  Pan Am 103 had some more or less famous passengers. Here is a selective list of some of them:  Charles Dennis McKee , head of a US Intelligence Team Mathew Gannon, CIA's deputy station chief in Beirut Bernt Carlsson,  swedish UN-diplomat    Lucky passengers  Some passengers even got off the plane, before it took off for the very last time. Such was  Pik Botha , former South African Foreign Minister a very lucky person....or maybe he knew something, that the rest of Pan Am 103's unfornunate passengers weren't supposed to know ? (Mr. Gerrit Pretorius, Mr. Botha`s private secretary at the time, confirmed that the South African delegation had been booked on fligth Pan-Am 103, but said it had arrived at Heathrow Airport an hour early and the South African Embassy had arranged a different flight to New York)  Indian citizen  Jaswant Basuta was another lucky passenger - notorious for missing his flights, he missed even this one while drinking beer with his brother-in-law at the airport. Thus he never made it to Pan Am 103 - but his luggage did, and after the crash he was questioned and withheld by British police as a suspect....  Another evident suspect and lucky passenger from Pan Am 103 was a certain  mr. Weinacker who never made it to the gate of Pan Am 103 in London, although his luggage did - and his suitcase, a beige softsided Samsonite bag, was loaded into the container, where the alleged explosion had took place, i.e. container AVE 4041 PA. For a couple of days mr. Weinacker must have felt like Fhima and Megrahi....but eventually police let go of him.  Another lucky guy was mr. Steve Green , Assistant, Office Intelligence DEA. Mr Steve Green has been seen, on the tarmac, watching the take-off of the doomed plane Pan-Am 103 at London Airport Heathrow. Together with him,  Oliver Revell  junior, survived Pan Am 103 by a lucky strike of incredible coincidences. Oliver Revell junior is the son of Mr. Oliver Buck Revell,  member of the FBI ...and one of the American head investigators in the Lockerbie case!  Finally did mr . John McCarty , U.S. Ambassador, Cyprus, change his mind about boarding Pan Am flight 103. He lived to tell about it, while others didn't.  Deborah Engelman - living to tell about Pan Am 103  "I was booked on Pan Am 103 - and survived!"   More stories about lucky survivors from Pan Am 103    The Tragedy of Syracuse University The average age for victims was below 35 -  Many young people were among the victims of Pan Am 103, mostly students and army volunteers coming home to the USA for christmas holiday. Syracuse University in Syracuse, USA, took the worst hit. 35 students from Syracuse University were passengers aboard the doomed aircraft Pan Am 103, all killed.     NEW:   The official Syracuse University Lockerbie Memorial website 1999    With news update, feature articles, pictures, links and legal information about the 35 Syracuse students victims, put up on the web by Syracuse law students in 1998/9. This is the site to go, if you are looking for recent updates and in-dept coverage of Syracuse Universities relation with Lockerbie and Pan Am 103.    NEW:  Picture gallery:   The 35 Syracuse students (drawings based on photos from SU yearbook)   Syracuse University Pan Am 103 archive and boxes    NEW:   Syracuse University Magazine's Special Pan Am 103 1988-1998 issue    You need Acrobat Reader to view this file   The first memorial service for the Syracuse victims, January 19, 1989  Syracuse University football coach Dick MacPherson in Lockerbie 1989  Memorial Place for those students killed in Pan Am 103  Artistical monument of victims's families at Syracuse University  ...and more about Suse Loewenstein  9th Memorial Celebrations for killed Syracuse students 1997  David Letterman is mocking Syracuse-monument artist  Joint Syracuse University/Lockerbie Academy student exchange fund  Memorial message  A tribute to Syracuse University students aboard Pan Am Flight 103  by JAMES T. WALSH of New York in the US House of Representatives, Thursday, October 1, 1998 Resume from the 1997 remembrance week at Syracuse University  Ten years later: remembering Pan Am 103 -   12th Oct 1998  by SU student Wendy Loughlin  Ceremony  recognizing 1998-99 Remembrance Scholars    23/10/1998    S.U. Dean David Rubin speaks at Hendricks Chapel    5/11/1998     Review:   Syracuse University Remembrance Week 1998      23+26/10/1998     ...and an article about the group behind SU's Pan Am 103-activities from "The Students Voice"     11/12/1998      All Syracuse Pan Am 103-memorial services and events October-December 21, 1998     In memory of victims - relatives battle for remembrance and justice There have been many crashes with civil airplanes for more than 50 years. Somehow the crash of PA 103 and the death of 270 innocent people remains as the worst crash ever in the minds of many people. The victims are all dead, but their voices have not calmed: relatives and friends have now for 10 years continuously raised the issue of Pan Am 103 and they tell the world: "We must never forget the victims of Pan Am 103 and their fate. "  That's why Jim Swire, who lost his daughter 21.12.1988 in that crash, formed the Lockerbie Victim Committee in order to represent the views and anger of those ever unable to speak up. The commite was formed on April 1st 1989 at Russel Square Hotel, not far from the British Museum. It is named:  UK Families Flight 103 .  Apart from a group in the USA, this is the biggest and most influental group of victim's relatives and friends to continuously lobby the world for an answer. The leader of the group is dr. James Swire, father of Fiona Swire, who was killed in the crash.  Apart from a group in the USA, this is the biggest and most influental group of victim's relatives and friends to continuously lobby the world for an answer. The leader of the group is dr. James Swire, father of Fiona Swire, who was killed in the crash.     Read more about the UK-group and dr. Jim Swire    In the USA there are no less than 4 groups of relatives lobbying for the victims of Pan Am 103. Occasionally they grab at each others throats - all gropus want justice for Pan Am 103, but they each have their very own opinion of exactly how this justice can be brought about...   A comprehensive (and critical!) list of the present 4 victim's committees in the USA  This is the biggest American Victim Support Group for the crash of Pan Am 103:                      Victims of Pan Am Flight 103                                PO Box 31                                Joppa, MD 21085                        phone (201) 391-0823       VOPAF 103-president sending message on the internet  NEW:  Report from latest VOPAF103-meeting in Albany, N.Y., 16-18. October 1998  Joint venture in early 1990: VOPAF 103 and UK Fam. 103 together in appeal  Early days: relatives with "Iran killed them!"-buttons in Washington  Early days: Relatives annoyed with lame US response    Read how some of the victim's families in USA reacted to the TWA 800-crash 1996   Full text of US court verdict Paul Hudson vs. the 2 Libyans 26/11/1996    Aphrodite Tsairis writes about her efforts to find justice.    Rosemary Wolfe, president of Justice for Pan Am 103  US relatives join the National Victims Center 1989   Victim's relatives disagree on campaign  Johanna Hesami, v.c. of  Families of Pan AM 103,  disagreeing with VOPAF 103 in 1990     Justice for Pan Am 103 tries to stop Libyans buying visa-checks in the USA  NEW:  US relatives in NPR interview 24/08/1998    Paying the damage and the loss: compensation for Pan Am 103 Besides remaining glued to the issues of the victims, their death and airplane security, the victim's committes have  themselves in the legal battle for compensation. According to the Warzaw Agreement of International Flight Insurance, the highest fare of compensation for the death of a passenger is 57000 USD. But when there is prooof of culpability, the relatives can raise new cases for higher compensation against airlines by using civil legislation. Members of the families and friend of victims from UK and from USA tried to make a legal claim for compensation from Pan Am some years ago:  About the compensation-suit against Pan Am:  Angry victims drag Pan Am to court  The LVC accepts Pan Am's compensation offer  The families of three passengers brought proceedings against Pan Am in New York in 1992 leading to a 13 week trial. The jury returned a special verdict finding Pan Am guilty of wilful misconduct in disobeying US government directives requiring the inspection of unaccompanied baggage.  Pan Am were said to have failed to institute the appropriate procedures at Frankfurt. The jury awarded damages to the three families totalling US $19,960,000. The cases of 207 other passengers will follow this decision.  Pan Am appealed the judgement of the New York District Court, challenging both the jury's finding of liability and the amount of damages awarded. Pan Am's appeal attempted to deal with the evidence relating to the alleged non-compliance with the regulations, and argued that any non-conformities were due to innocent mistakes.  The court held that the evidence overwhelmingly supported the jury's conclusion that, but for Pan Am's wholly inadequate terrorist prevention techniques and deliberate indifference, the bombing and senseless loss of life would not have occurred. The awards, however, were altered to disallow damages for loss of parents' care and guidance where the plaintiff child was not a minor.  The Lockerbie incident struck a deep chord in the US, standing as a reminder of collective vulnerability to wanton terrorist acts. The attack also contributed to the demise of Pan Am, one of the world's first airlines.  This decision paved the way for determination of the balance of passenger claims.  Wife of American victim files lawsuit aganist Pan Am(original court text)  ...and she wins that lawsuit and gets millions of US$....  Lawyer Lee Kreindler files 20-million USD-lawsuit against Fhima and Megrahi  ....and the appeal verdict regarding Libya's claim to immunity from civil lawsuit  The American relatives are now starting to find other ways to seek even more compensation money from elsewhere. Thus they use American civil legislation to file a lawsuit against Libya, whom they believe is guilty of putting the bomb on Pan Am 103. How can they do that, when Fhima and Megrahi never have been tried in the US ?  Well, think back to the O.J.Simpson case.....he was filed not guilty in a criminal court, but guilty in a civil court, having to pay compensation even if he was aquitted by the criminal court. This can only happen in a place like the USA, the only country in the world with such a system.  However, in order to get their claims against Libya tried by a jury, the evidence against Libya will not be made public by both the criminal courts in the US as well as the British/Scottish police. They refused to provide the criminal evidence to the American Victim's commitees for trial. So until further, there can be no just civil trial against Libya in the USA to the regret of the many American relatives.  Lawyer Lee Kreindler invited the relatives of the British and Scottish victims to join him in the USA for such a trial, but surprisingly they refused.     Why British relatives refuse to join a civil trial against Libya in the USA   Individual stories I am looking for anyone providing inside stories of victims and their fate. Please send your contributions to  this adress , thank you !  Long Island - Victim list and feature  Father of victim receives threat to pay tax from compensation money!  Theodora Cohen as her parents remember her 1989  Daniel and Susan Cohen mourn the death of their daughter by fighting against terrorism  ....and mrs. Cohens letter to Detroit Free Press 1990  NEW:  Dan Cohen looks 10 years back on the fatal day where he lost his daughter  Georgia Nucci about the death of her son Christopher Jones  Father of twin victims writes poem about his sons  Joe Horgan about his brother-in-law Mike Doyle from PA 103  The mournings of the Saunders family  Victim becomes suspect - the story of Khalid Jaafar  Memorial Annual Award of Gregory Capasso from Buffalo University  Two students from Oswego College killed on Pan Am 103  Diane Maslowski and Richard Monetti - two stories  George Williams remembers his son Geordie 1988-1998     NEW: Watch a  CBS interview with 103-relative Bert Ammerman,  talking about a possible trial in the Netherlands 29/07/1998.  ......  the story of Bert Ammerman and his brother Tom, who died on PA 103  Bruce Smith used insurance payment for terrorist capture rewards  Artist Gretchen Dater post-mortem exhibition  Ben and Pauline never recovered from double loss  Grieving husband expelled from Mid East conference by security guards for shouting questions  Eleanor Bright quarrelled with Lawrence Eagleburger over Bush's "bumrap"-expression 1991  Early interview with Jim Swire (1990) about his daughter Flora  Susan Bennett lost her husband Larry  Pamela Dix from British UK Families Flight 103 mourns her dead brother  Student Ken Bissett memorial page  Special memorial-programmes from ABC NIGHTLINE:   The Keepers  , 9 years after the crash of Pan Am 103 , featuring talks with relatives and survivors Memorial David Dornstein Writer Award to remember killed jewish student  Irving Sigal was a leading reserchaer of HIV and AIDS when he was killed  Wrong body of victim is given to grieving family by mistake  Tomas F. vanTienhoven died 21 December, 1988 on Pan Am flight 103. He graduated in Civil Engineering, and was Vice President and Director of Tech Services for Sheraton Management Corporation in London, England.     Widow of John B. Cummock tells her story and   more about Victoria Cummock   NEW:  Victoria Cummock in Lockerbie, December 1998  Another academic reward, in memory of victim Alexia Tsairis  Wife of victim sues Federal Express for lost videotape of husband 1989  Writer Award in memory of victim Gregory Capasso  Melina Hudson died at just 16   Later her father become Executive Director of US Aviation Committee  Gabriel Della Ripa - Italian born American from New York  Kesha Weedon, Bronx-native dead on Pan Am 103 together with her boyfriend  Lockerbie orphan found dead in Thai hotel  UK to relatives: "Your son is nobody!"  Post-mortem performance of Sarah Aicher  .... and the garden dedicated to Sarah Aicher  Bonnie Ahern O'Connor about her brother John's death on PA 103  Mother of victims gets married in Lockerbie to honor dead daughter and son-in-law  NEW:  Kiran Khanna remembers her father Surinder Mohan Bhatia  NEW:  10 years later, several relatives look back to the 21st of December 1988  NEW:  10 years later - more selected interviews with relatives about the crash  NEW:  Vanessa Herbert Drew remembers her sister Pam  ...more to come...for more stories of victims etc. look at the  passenger-list  .    Graveyards and Memorial Sites At the crash sites in Lockerbie, Scotland and in the graveyard outside Lockerbie, there are some historical monuments and victim-shrines. In one of them at the Lockerbie Graveyard, you can find a public shrine with books of the lives of every victim killed in the crash, pictures of victimes, and a book to sign your comment or read what other people have written in condolence to the victims.  US kin visiting Lockerbie crash site  There is a memorial place at Arlington Churchyard/Cemetary in USA, which has been built up by 270 stones, directly imported from Lockerbie, Scotland.   The Lockerbie Memorial Place at Arlington   Some relatives went for a boycot of the ceremony in 1995  On 21st of December 1993, senator Edward Kennedy made a speech there, and on December 21st 1995, president William Clinton held a  speech  there to further his re-election.  Not all US relatives are happy about their governments and the lack of effort and enthusiasm for the cause of Pan Am 103. Much talk, but few actions, is what the relatives say the Clinton administration is doing.  Intensity of grief and anger    10 year anniversary commemoration events 21/12/1998  ...at Arlington, Lockerbie and Westminster Abbey etc.   These are victims, too !!!  Not only direct victims of the Lockerbie Incident and their families have and are suffering. Other people are affected, more or less remotely, by actions and incidents following the criminal and political trail of the crash of Pan Am 103. Whether you like it or not - they are victims, too ! You might find this provocative, but as long as no one has been found guilty of the crime in front of a court of law, suspects are supposed to be innocent....that is, if they are not unfortunate and born as Libyans...  Human rights say, that any accused person is  innocent  until procen  guilty  . In the legal system of the UN, people are usually  innocent  until proven  Libyan  !!!  (or Irish or Iraqi or Sudanese or muslim or black or jewish or....) Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi Some say this Libyan citizen is guilty. He has never been proved to be guilty. He remains innocent until proven guilty. But he has suffered imprisonment, psychical harrasment, and his legal rights have been violated. His family suffers.He cannot travel outside Libya on holiday. He is one of the alleged culprits, that the governments of USA and UK say is responsible for placing a bomb aboard Pan Am 103. As things are going right now, he seems just to be another rival to the list of scapegoats. Lamen Khalifa Fhima Some say this Libyan citizen is guilty. He has never been proved to be guilty. He remains innocent until proven guilty. But he has suffered imprisonment, psychical harrasment, and his legal rights have been violated. His family suffers.He cannot travel outside Libya on holiday. He is one of the alleged culprits, that the governments of USA and UK say is responsible for placing a bomb aboard Pan Am 103. As things are going right now, he seems just to be another rival to the list of scapegoats. Muammar Abu Meniar Al-Qadhafi This is the man, that continously is beeing blamed as the master mind behind the bombing of Pan Am 103. But not one person has laid forward any proof. We can go on blaming everybody from the Pope to Mother Teresa for having done the crime...but without proof, all allegations are pure fantasies. One might like Qadhafi or dislike him. But he has rights, too. His human rights are at this minute beeing violated by the accusations of the USA and the UK. If YOU were in his shoes...wouldn't you suffer, too ? On how many innocent people will the blame be put, until the USA and the UK are satisfied and content ?      Libyan citizens, 100 % not involved in the Lockerbie Incident, such as Libyan children, elderly and other weak Libyan citizens are dying today because of UN-sanctions against Libya since 1992. They are forced to travel with ship, since all air-traffic in and out of Libya is forbidden. Some Libyans actually don't make it travelling through the desert at 40 degrees celsius. They die of heart failure.  Libyans die from not beeing transferred by aircraft for surgery in emergency situations. Libyans die in domestic flight air-crashes, because of lack of spare parts. Libyans and other Arabs residing in USA or UKare beeing harrassed for no apperate reason.Libyan national economy is rolling downwards. I could go on and on....    Read the UN-report on the impact of the UN-sanctions against Libya    More about Libya, UN-sanctions and the crash of pan Am 103        Back to Main Page 
