 The Bombing of PanAm Flight 103 -- Case Not Closed

  go to end     (written 2001) 
           The Bombing of PanAm Flight 103    
                 Case Not Closed                    by William Blum  
                                  
  The newspapers were filled with pictures of happy relatives 
 of the victims of the December 21, 1988 bombing of PanAm 103 over 
 Lockerbie, Scotland.  A Libyan, Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al Megrahi, 
 had been found guilty of the crime the day before, January 31, 
 2001, by a Scottish court in the Hague, though his co-defendant, 
 Al Amin Khalifa Fhimah, was acquitted.  At long last there was 
 going to be some kind of closure for the families.  
  But what was wrong with this picture? 
  What was wrong was that the evidence against Megrahi was 
 thin to the point of transparency.  Coming the month after the 
 (s)election of George W. Bush, the Hague verdict could have been 
 dubbed Supreme Court II, another instance of non-judicial factors 
 fatally clouding judicial reasoning.  The three Scottish judges 
 could not have relished returning to the United Kingdom after 
 finding both defendants innocent of the murder of 270 people, 
 largely from the U.K. and the United States.  Not to mention 
 having to face dozens of hysterical victims' family members in 
 the courtroom.  The three judges also well knew the fervent 
 desires of the White House and Downing Street as to the outcome.  
 If both men had been acquitted, the United States and Great 
 Britain would have had to answer for a decade of sanctions and 
 ill will directed toward Libya. 
  One has to read the entire 26,000-word "Opinion of the 
 Court", as well as being very familiar with the history of the 
 case going back to 1988, to appreciate how questionable was the 
 judges' verdict.  
  The key charge against Megrahi -- the  sine qua non  -- was 
 that he placed explosives in a suitcase and tagged it so it would 
 lead the following charmed life: 1)loaded aboard an Air Malta 
 flight to Frankfurt without an accompanying passenger; 
 2)transferred in Frankfurt to the PanAm 103A flight to London 
 without an accompanying passenger; 3)transferred in London to the 
 PanAm 103 flight to New York without an accompanying passenger. 
  To the magic bullet of the JFK assassination, can we now add 
 the magic suitcase? 
  This scenario by itself would have been a major feat and so 
 unlikely to succeed that any terrorist with any common sense 
 would have found a better way.  But aside from anything else, we 
 have this -- as to the first step, loading the suitcase at Malta: 
 there was no witness, no video, no document, no fingerprints, 
 nothing to tie Megrahi to the particular brown Samsonite 
 suitcase, no past history of terrorism, no forensic evidence of 
 any kind linking him or Fhimah to such an act. 
  And the court admitted it: "The absence of any explanation 
 of the method by which the primary suitcase might have been 
 placed on board KM180 [Air Malta] is a major difficulty for the 
 Crown case."{1} 
  Moreover, under security requirements in 1988, unaccompanied 
 baggage was subjected to special X-ray examinations, plus -- 
 because of recent arrests in Germany -- the security personnel in 
 Frankfurt were on the lookout specifically for a bomb secreted in 
 a radio, which turned out to indeed be the method used with the 
 PanAm 103 bomb. 
  Requiring some sort of direct and credible testimony linking 
 Megrahi to the bombing, the Hague court placed great -- nay, 
 paramount -- weight upon the supposed identification of the 
 Libyan by a shopkeeper in Malta, as the purchaser of the clothing 
 found in the bomb suitcase.  But this shopkeeper had earlier 
 identified several other people as the culprit, including one who 
 was a CIA agent.{1a}  When he finally identified Megrahi from a 
 photo, it was after Megrahi's photo had been in the world news 
 for years.  The court acknowledged the possible danger inherent 
 in such a verification: "These identifications were criticised 
  inter alia  on the ground that photographs of the accused have 
 featured many times over the years in the media and accordingly 
 purported identifications more than 10 years after the event are 
 of little if any value."{2} 
  There were also major discrepancies between the shopkeeper's 
 original description of the clothes-buyer and Megrahi's actual 
 appearance.  The shopkeeper told police that the customer was 
 "six feet or more in height" and "was about 50 years of age." 
 Megrahi was 5'8" tall and was 36 in 1988.  The judges again 
 acknowledged the weakness of their argument by conceding that the 
 initial description "would not in a number of respects fit the 
 first accused [Megrahi]" and that "it has to be accepted that 
 there was a substantial discrepancy."{3}      Nevertheless, the judges went ahead and accepted the  identification as accurate. Before the indictment of the two  Libyans in Washington in November 1991, the press had reported  police findings that the clothing had been purchased on  November 23, 1988.{4}  But the indictment of Megrahi states  that he made the purchase on December 7.  Can this be because  the investigators were able to document Megrahi being in Malta  (where he worked for Libya Airlines) on that date but cannot  do so for November 23?{5} 
  There is also this to be considered -- If the bomber needed 
 some clothing to wrap up an ultra-secret bomb in a suitcase, 
 would he go to a clothing store in the city where he planned to 
 carry out his dastardly deed, where he knew he'd likely be 
 remembered as an obvious foreigner, and buy brand new, easily 
 traceable items?   Would an intelligence officer -- which Megrahi 
 was alleged to be -- do this?  Or even a common boob?  Wouldn't 
 it make more sense to use any old clothing, from anywhere? 
  Furthermore, after the world was repeatedly assured that 
 these items of clothing were sold only on Malta, it was learned 
 that at least one of the items was actually "sold at dozens of 
 outlets throughout Europe, and it was impossible to trace the 
 purchaser."{6} 
  The "Opinion of the Court" placed considerable weight on the 
 suspicious behavior of Megrahi prior to the fatal day, making 
 much of his comings and goings abroad, phone calls to unknown 
 parties for unknown reasons, the use of a pseudonym, etc. 
 The three judges tried to squeeze as much mileage out of these 
 events as they could, as if they had no better case to make. 
 But if Megrahi was indeed a member of Libyan intelligence, we 
 must consider that intelligence agents have been known to act in 
 mysterious ways, for whatever assignment they're on.  The court, 
 however, had no idea what assignment, if any, Megrahi was working 
 on. 
  There is much more that is known about the case that makes 
 the court verdict and written opinion questionable, although 
 credit must be given the court for its frankness about what it 
 was doing, even while it was doing it.  "We are aware that in 
 relation to certain aspects of the case there are a number of 
 uncertainties and qualifications," the judges wrote.  "We are 
 also aware that there is a danger that by selecting parts of the 
 evidence which seem to fit together and ignoring parts which 
 might not fit, it is possible to read into a mass of conflicting 
 evidence a pattern or conclusion which is not really justified."{7} 
  It is remarkable, given all that the judges conceded was 
 questionable or uncertain in the trial -- not to mention all that 
 was questionable or uncertain that they  didn't  concede -- that at 
 the end of the day they could still declare to the world that 
 "There is nothing in the evidence which leaves us with any 
 reasonable doubt as to the guilt of [Megrahi]".{8} 
   The Guardian  of London later wrote that two days before the 
 verdict, "senior Foreign Office officials briefed a group of 
 journalists in London.  They painted a picture of a bright new 
 chapter in Britain's relations with Colonel Gadafy's regime.  
 They made it quite clear they assumed both the Libyans in the 
 dock would be acquitted.  The Foreign Office officials were not 
 alone.  Most independent observers believed it was impossible for 
 the court to find the prosecution had proved its case against 
 Megrahi beyond reasonable doubt."{9}     Alternative scenario  
 There is, moreover, an alternative scenario, laying the 
 blame on Palestinians, Iran and Syria, which is much better 
 documented and makes a lot more sense, logistically and 
 otherwise. 
  Indeed, this was the Original Official Version, delivered 
 with Olympian rectitude by the U.S. government -- guaranteed, 
 sworn to, scout's honor, case closed -- until the buildup to the 
 Gulf War came along in 1990 and the support of Iran and Syria was 
 needed. 
  Washington was anxious as well to achieve the release of 
 American hostages held in Lebanon by groups close to Iran.  Thus 
 it was that the scurrying sound of backtracking became audible in 
 the corridors of the White House. 
  Suddenly -- or so it seemed -- in October 1990, there was a 
 New Official Version: It was Libya -- the Arab state least 
 supportive of the U.S. build-up to the Gulf War and the sanctions 
 imposed against Iraq -- that was behind the bombing after all, 
 declared Washington.  
         The two Libyans were formally indicted in the U.S. and 
 Scotland on Nov. 14, 1991. 
  "This was a Libyan government operation from start to 
 finish," declared the State Department spokesman.{10} 
  "The Syrians took a bum rap on this," said President George 
 H.W. Bush.{11} 
  Within the next 20 days, the remaining four American 
 hostages were released along with the most prominent British 
 hostage, Terry Waite. 
        The Original Official Version accused the PFLP-GC, a 1968 
 breakaway from a component of the Palestine Liberation 
 Organization, of making the bomb and somehow placing it 
 aboard the flight in Frankfurt. 
        The PFLP-GC was led by Ahmed Jabril, one of the world's 
 leading terrorists, and was headquartered in, financed by, and 
 closely supported by, Syria.  The bombing was allegedly done at 
 the behest of Iran as revenge for the U.S. shooting down of an 
 Iranian passenger plane over the Persian Gulf on July 3, 1988, 
 which claimed 290 lives. 
       The support for this scenario was, and remains, impressive, 
 as the following sample indicates: 
      In April 1989, the FBI -- in response to criticism that it 
 was bungling the investigation -- leaked to CBS the news that it 
 had tentatively identified the person who unwittingly carried the 
 bomb aboard.  His name was Khalid Jaafar, a 21-year-old Lebanese- 
 American.  The report said that the bomb had been planted in 
 Jaafar's suitcase by a member of the PFLP-GC, whose name was not 
 revealed.{12} 
      In May, the State Department stated that the CIA was 
 "confident" of the Iran-Syria-PFLP-GC account of events.{13} 
      On Sept. 20,  The Times  of London reported that "security 
 officials from Britain, the United States and West Germany are 
 'totally satisfied' that it was the PFLP-GC" behind the crime. 
      In December 1989, Scottish investigators announced that they 
 had "hard evidence" of the involvement of the PFLP-GC in the 
 bombing.{14} 
      A National Security Agency electronic intercept disclosed 
 that Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, Iranian interior minister, had paid 
 Palestinian terrorists $10 million dollars to gain revenge for 
 the downed Iranian airplane.(15)  The intercept appears to have 
 occurred in July 1988, shortly after the downing of the Iranian 
 plane. 
      Israeli intelligence also intercepted a communication 
 between Mohtashemi and the Iranian embassy in Beirut "indicating 
 that Iran paid for the Lockerbie bombing."{16} 
      Even after the Libyans had been indicted, Israeli officials 
 declared that their intelligence analysts remained convinced that 
 the PFLP-GC bore primary responsibility for the bombing.{17} 
      In 1992, Abu Sharif, a political adviser to PLO chairman 
 Yasser Arafat, stated that the PLO had compiled a secret report 
 which concluded that the bombing of 103 was the work of a "Middle 
 Eastern country" other than Libya.{18} 
      In February 1995, former Scottish Office minister, Alan 
 Stewart, wrote to the British Foreign Secretary and the Lord 
 Advocate, questioning the reliability of evidence which had led 
 to the accusations against the two Libyans.  This move, wrote  The  
  Guardian , reflected the concern of the Scottish legal profession, 
 reaching into the Crown Office (Scotland's equivalent of the 
 Attorney General's Office), that the bombing may not have been 
 the work of Libya, but of Syrians, Palestinians and Iranians.{19} 
      We must also ask why Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, 
 writing in her 1993 memoirs about the US bombing of Libya in 
 1986, with which Britain had cooperated, stated: "But the much 
 vaunted Libyan counter-attack did not and could not take place.  
 Gaddafy had not been destroyed but he had been humbled.  There 
 was a marked decline in Libyan-sponsored terrorism in succeeding 
 years."{20}     Key Question  
 A key question in the PFLP-GC version has always been: How did 
 the bomb get aboard the plane in Frankfurt, or at some other 
 point?  One widely disseminated explanation was in a report, 
 completed during the summer of 1989 and leaked in the fall, which 
 had been prepared by a New York investigating firm called 
 Interfor.  Headed by a former Israeli intelligence agent, Juval 
 Aviv, Interfor -- whose other clients included Fortune 500 
 companies, the FBI, IRS and Secret Service{21} -- was hired by 
 the law firm representing PanAm's insurance carrier. 
 The Interfor Report said that in the mid-1980s, a drug and 
 arms smuggling operation was set up in various European cities, 
 with Frankfurt airport as the site of one of the drug routes.  
 The Frankfurt operation was run by Manzer Al-Kassar, a Syrian, 
 the same man from whom Oliver North's shadowy network purchased 
 large quantities of arms for the contras.  At the airport, 
 according to the report, a courier would board a flight with 
 checked luggage containing innocent items; after the luggage had 
 passed all security checks, one or another accomplice Turkish 
 baggage handler for PanAm would substitute an identical suitcase 
 containing contraband; the passenger then picked up this suitcase 
 upon arrival at the destination. 
      The only courier named by Interfor was Khalid Jaafar, who, 
 as noted above, had been named by the FBI a few months earlier as 
 the person who unwittingly carried the bomb aboard. 
      The Interfor report spins a web much too lengthy and complex 
 to go into here.  The short version is that the CIA in Germany 
 discovered the airport drug operation and learned also that 
 Kassar had the contacts to gain the release of American hostages 
 in Lebanon.  He had already done the same for French hostages.  
 Thus it was, that the CIA and the German Bundeskriminalamt (BKA, 
 Federal Criminal Office) allowed the drug operation to continue 
 in hopes of effecting the release of American hostages.   
 According to the report, this same smuggling ring and its 
 method of switching suitcases at the Frankfurt airport were used 
 to smuggle the fatal bomb aboard flight 103, under the eyes of 
 the CIA and BKA.  
      In January 1990, Interfor gave three of the baggage handlers 
 polygraphs and two of them were judged as being deceitful when 
 denying any involvement in baggage switching.  However, neither 
 the U.S., UK or German investigators showed any interest in the 
 results, or in questioning the baggage handlers.  Instead, the 
 polygrapher, James Keefe, was hauled before a Washington grand 
 jury, and, as he puts it, "They were bent on destroying my 
 credibility -- not theirs" [the baggage handlers].  To Interfor, 
 the lack of interest in the polygraph results and the attempt at 
 intimidation of Keefe was the strongest evidence of a cover-up by 
 the various government authorities who did not want their 
 permissive role in the baggage switching to be revealed.{22} 
  Critics claimed that the Interfor report had been inspired 
 by PanAm's interest in proving that it was impossible for normal 
 airline security to have prevented the loading of the bomb, thus 
 removing the basis for accusing the airline of negligence. 
  The report was the principal reason PanAm's attorneys 
 subpoenaed the FBI, CIA, DEA, State Department, National Security 
 Council, and NSA, as well as, reportedly, the Defense 
 Intelligence Agency and FAA, to turn over all documents relating 
 to the crash of 103 or to a drug operation preceding the crash.  
 The government moved to quash the subpoenas on grounds of 
 "national security", and refused to turn over a single document 
 in open court, although it gave some to a judge to view 
 privately. 
  The judge later commented that he was "troubled about    certain parts" of what he'd read, adding "I don't know quite  what   to do because I think some of the material may be  significant."{23}     Drugs Revelation  
 On October 30, 1990, NBC-TV News reported that "PanAm flights 
 from Frankfurt, including 103, had been used a number of times by 
 the DEA as part of its undercover operation to fly informants and 
 suitcases of heroin into Detroit as part of a sting operation to 
 catch dealers in Detroit." 
  The TV network reported that the DEA was looking into the 
 possibility that a young man who lived in Michigan and regularly 
 visited the Middle East may have unwittingly carried the bomb 
 aboard flight 103.  His name was Khalid Jaafar.  "Unidentified 
 law enforcement sources" were cited as saying that Jaafar had 
 been a DEA informant and was involved in a drug-sting operation 
 based out of Cyprus.  The DEA was investigating whether the 
 PFLP-GC had tricked Jaafar into carrying a suitcase containing 
 the bomb instead of the drugs he usually carried. 
  The NBC report quoted an airline source as saying: 
 "Informants would put [suit]cases of heroin on the PanAm flights 
 apparently without the usual security checks, through an 
 arrangement between the DEA and German authorities."{24} 
  These revelations were enough to inspire a congressional 
 hearing, held in December, entitled, "Drug Enforcement 
 Administration's Alleged Connection to the PanAm Flight 103 
 Disaster". 
  The chairman of the committee, Cong. Robert Wise (Dem., W. 
 VA.), began the hearing by lamenting the fact that the DEA and 
 the Department of Justice had not made any of their field agents 
 who were most knowledgeable about flight 103 available to 
 testify; that they had not provided requested written 
 information, including the results of the DEA's investigation 
 into the air disaster; and that "the FBI to this date has been 
 totally uncooperative". 
  The two DEA officials who did testify admitted that the 
 agency had, in fact, run "controlled drug deliveries" through 
 Frankfurt airport with the cooperation of German authorities, 
 using U.S. airlines, but insisted that no such operation had been 
 conducted in December 1988.  (The drug agency had said nothing of 
 its sting operation to the President's Commission on Aviation 
 Security and Terrorism which had held hearings in the first 
 months of 1990 in response to the 103 bombing.) 
  The officials denied that the DEA had had any "association 
 with Mr. Jaafar in any way, shape, or form."  However, to 
 questions concerning Jaafar's background, family, and his 
 frequent trips to Lebanon, they asked to respond only in closed 
 session.  They made the same request in response to several other 
 questions.{25}   
  NBC News had reported on October 30 that the DEA had told 
 law enforcement officers in Detroit not to talk to the media 
 about Jaafar. 
  The hearing ended after but one day, even though Wise had 
 promised a "full-scale" investigation and indicated during the 
 hearing that there would be more to come.  What was said in the 
 closed sessions remains closed.{26} 
  One of the DEA officials who testified, Stephen Greene, had 
 himself had a reservation on flight 103, but he canceled because 
 of one or more of the several international warnings that had 
 preceded the fateful day.  He has described standing on the 
 Heathrow tarmac, watching the doomed plane take off.{27} 
  There have been many reports of heroin being found in the 
 field around the crash, from "traces" to "a substantial quantity" 
 found in a suitcase.{28}  Two days after the NBC report, however, 
 the  New York Times  quoted a "federal official" saying that "no 
 hard drugs were aboard the aircraft."     The film  
 In 1994, American filmmaker Allan Francovich completed a 
 documentary, "The Maltese Double Cross", which presents Jaafar as 
 an unwitting bomb carrier with ties to the DEA and the CIA.  
 Showings of the film in Britain were canceled under threat of law 
 suits, venues burglarized or attacked by arsonists.  When Channel 
 4 agreed to show the film, the Scottish Crown Office and the U.S. 
 Embassy in London sent press packs to the media, labeling the 
 film "blatant propaganda" and attacking some of the film's 
 interviewees, including Juval Aviv the head of Interfor.{29}   
 Aviv paid a price for his report and his outspokenness.  
 Over a period of time, his New York office suffered a series of 
 break-ins, the FBI visited his clients, his polygrapher was 
 harassed, as mentioned above, and a contrived commercial fraud 
 charge was brought against him.  Even though Aviv eventually was 
 cleared in court, it was a long, expensive, and painful 
 ordeal.{30}     
  Francovich also stated that he had learned that five CIA 
 operatives had been sent to London and Cyprus to discredit the 
 film while it was being made, that his office phones were tapped, 
 that staff cars were sabotaged, and that one of his researchers 
 narrowly escaped an attempt to force his vehicle into the path of 
 an oncoming truck.{31} 
  Government officials examining the Lockerbie bombing went so 
 far as to ask the FBI to investigate the film.  The Bureau later 
 issued a highly derogatory opinion of it.{32} 
  The film's detractors made much of the fact that the film 
 was initially funded jointly by a UK company (two-thirds) and a 
 Libyan government investment arm (one-third).  Francovich said 
 that he was fully aware of this and had taken pains to negotiate 
 a guarantee of independence from any interference. 
  On April 17, 1997, Allan Francovich suddenly died of a heart 
 attack at age 56, upon arrival at Houston Airport.{33}  His film 
 has had virtually no showings in the United States.     Abu Talb  
 The DEA sting operation and Interfor's baggage-handler hypothesis 
 both predicate the bomb suitcase being placed aboard the plane in 
 Frankfurt without going through the normal security checks.  In 
 either case, it eliminates the need for the questionable 
 triple-unaccompanied baggage scenario.  With either scenario the 
 clothing could still have been purchased in Malta, but in any 
 event we don't need the Libyans for that. 
  Mohammed Abu Talb fits that and perhaps other pieces of the 
 puzzle.  The Palestinian had close ties to PFLP-GC cells in 
 Germany which were making Toshiba radio-cassette bombs, similar, 
 if not identical, to what was used to bring down 103.  In October 
 1988, two months before Lockerbie, the German police raided these 
 cells, finding several such bombs.  In May 1989, Talb was 
 arrested in Sweden, where he lived, and was later convicted of 
 taking part in several bombings of the offices of American 
 airline companies in Scandinavia.  In his Swedish flat, police 
 found large quantities of clothing made in Malta.   
  Police investigation of Talb disclosed that during October 
 1988 he had been to Cyprus and Malta, at least once in the 
 company of Hafez Dalkamoni, the leader of the German PFLP-GC, who 
 was arrested in the raid.  The men met with PFLP-GC members who 
 lived in Malta.  Talb was also in Malta on November 23, which was 
 originally reported as the date of the clothing purchase before 
 the indictment of the Libyans, as mentioned earlier. 
  After his arrest, Talb told investigators that between 
 October and December 1988 he had retrieved and passed to another 
 person a bomb that had been hidden in a building used by the 
 PFLP-GC in Germany.  Officials declined to identify the person to 
 whom Talb said he had passed the bomb.  A month later, however, 
 he recanted his confession. 
  Talb was reported to possess a brown Samsonite suitcase and 
 to have circled December 21 in a diary seized in his Swedish flat.  
 After the raid upon his flat, his wife was heard to telephone 
 Palestinian friends and say: "Get rid of the clothes." 
  In December 1989, Scottish police, in papers filed with 
 Swedish legal officials, made Talb the only publicly identified 
 suspect "in the murder or participation in the murder of 270 
 people"; the Palestinian subsequently became another of the 
 several individuals to be identified by the Maltese shopkeeper 
 from a photo as the clothing purchaser.{34}  Since that time, the 
 world has scarcely heard of Abu Talb, who was sentenced to life 
 in prison in Sweden, but never charged with anything to do with 
 Lockerbie. 
  In Allan Francovich's film, members of Khalid Jaafar's family 
 -- which long had ties to the drug trade in Lebanon's notorious 
 Bekaa Valley -- are interviewed.  In either halting English or 
 translated Arabic, or paraphrased by the film's narrator, they 
 drop many bits of information, but which are difficult to put 
 together into a coherent whole.  Amongst the bits ... Khalid had 
 told his parents that he'd met Talb in Sweden and had been given 
 Maltese clothing ... someone had given Khalid a tape recorder, or 
 put one into his bag ... he was told to go to Germany to friends 
 of PFLP-GC leader Ahmed Jabril who would help him earn some money 
 ... he arrived in Germany with two kilos of heroin ... "He didn't 
 know it was a bomb.  They gave him the drugs to take to Germany.  
 He didn't know.  Who wants to die?" ... 
  It can not be stated with certainty what happened at 
 Frankfurt airport on that fateful day, if, as seems most likely, 
 that is the place where the bomb was placed into the system.  
 Either Jaafar, the DEA courier, arrived with his suitcase of 
 heroin and bomb and was escorted through security by the proper 
 authorities, or this was a day he was a courier for Manzer 
 al-Kassar, and the baggage handlers did their usual switch.  
 Or perhaps we'll never know for sure what happened.   
  On February 16, 1990, a group of British relatives of Lockerbie 
 victims went to the American Embassy in London for a meeting with 
 members of the President's Commission on Aviation Security and 
 Terrorism.  After the meeting, Britisher Martin Cadman was 
 chatting with two of the commission members.  He later reported 
 what one of them had said to him: "Your government and our 
 government know exactly what happened at Lockerbie.  But they are 
 not going to tell you."{35}     Comments about the Hague Court verdict  
  "The judges nearly agreed with the defense.  In their 
 verdict, they tossed out much of the prosecution witnesses' 
 evidence as false or questionable and said the prosecution had 
 failed to prove crucial elements, including the route that the 
 bomb suitcase took." --  New York Times  analysis.{36} 
  "It sure does look like they bent over backwards to find a 
 way to convict, and you have to assume the political context of 
 the case influenced them." -- Michael Scharf, professor, New 
 England School of Law.{37} 
  "I thought this was a very, very weak circumstantial 
 case.  I am absolutely astounded, astonished.  I was extremely 
 reluctant to believe that any Scottish judge would convict 
 anyone, even a Libyan, on the basis of such evidence." -- Robert 
 Black, Scottish law professor who was the architect of the Hague 
 trial.{38} 
  "A general pattern of the trial consisted in the fact that 
 virtually all people presented by the prosecution as key 
 witnesses were proven to lack credibility to a very high extent, 
 in certain cases even having openly lied to the court." 
   "While the first accused was found 'guilty', the second 
 accused was found 'not guilty'. ... This is totally 
 incomprehensible for any rational observer when one considers 
 that the indictment in its very essence was based on the joint 
 action of the two accused in Malta." 
   "As to the undersigned's knowledge, there is not a single 
 piece of material evidence linking the two accused to the crime.  
 In such a context, the guilty verdict in regard to the first 
 accused appears to be arbitrary, even irrational. ... This leads 
 the undersigned to the suspicion that political considerations 
 may have been overriding a strictly judicial evaluation of the 
 case ... Regrettably, through the conduct of the Court, 
 disservice has been done to the important cause of international 
 criminal justice." -- Hans Koechler, appointed as an international  observer of the Lockerbie Trial by UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan.{39} 
 So, let's hope that Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al Megrahi is really 
 guilty.  It would be a terrible shame if he spends the rest of 
 his life in prison because back in 1990 Washington's hegemonic 
 plans for the Middle East needed a convenient enemy, which just 
 happened to be his country. 
       NOTES        1. "Opinion of the Court", Par. 39 
 1a. Mark Perry,  Eclipse: The Last Days of the CIA   (Wm. Morrow, New York, 1992), pp.342-7. 
 2. "Opinion of the Court", Par. 55 
 3. "Opinion of the Court", Par. 68 
 4. See, e.g., Sunday Times (London), Nov. 12, 1989, p.3. 
 5. For a detailed discussion of this issue see, "A Special Report 
 from Private Eye: Lockerbie the Flight from Justice", May/June 
 2001, pp.20-22; Private Eye is a magazine published in London. 
 6. Sunday Times (London), December 17, 1989, p. 14.  Malta is, in 
 fact, a major manufacturer of clothing sold throughout the world. 
 7. "Opinion of the Court", Par. 89 
 8. Ibid. 
 9. The Guardian (London), June 19, 2001 
 10. New York Times, Nov. 15, 1991 
 11. Los Angeles Times, Nov. 15, 1991 
 12. New York Times, April 13, 1989, p.9; David Johnston, 
  Lockerbie: The Tragedy of Flight 103  (New York, 1989), pp.157, 
 161-2.  
 13. Washington Post, May 11, 1989, p. 1 
 14. New York Times, December 16, 1989, p.3. 
 15. Department of the Air Force -- Air Intelligence Agency 
 intelligence summary report, March 4, 1991, released under a FOIA 
 request made by lawyers for PanAm.  Reports of the intercept 
 appeared in the press long before the above document was 
 released; see, e.g., New York Times, Sept. 27, 1989, p.11; 
 October 31, 1989, p.8; Sunday Times, October 29, 1989, p.4.  But 
 it wasn't until Jan. 1995 that the exact text became widely 
 publicized and caused a storm in the UK, although ignored in the 
 U.S. 
 16. The Times (London), September 20, 1989, p.1 
 17. New York Times, November 21, 1991, p. 14.  It should be borne 
 in mind, however, that Israel may have been influenced because of 
 its hostility toward the PFLP-GC. 
 18. Reuters dispatch, datelined Tunis, Feb. 26, 1992 
 19. The Guardian, Feb. 24, 1995, p.7 
 20. Margaret Thatcher,  The Downing Street Years  (New York, 1993), 
 pp.448-9. 
 21. National Law Journal, Sept. 25, 1995, p.A11, from papers 
 filed in a New York court case. 
 22. Barron's (New York), December 17, 1990, pp.19, 22.  A copy of 
 the Interfor Report is in the author's possession, but he has 
 been unable to locate a complete copy of it on the Internet. 
 23. Barron's, op. cit., p. 18. 
 24. The Times (London), November 1, 1990, p.3; Washington Times, 
 October 31, 1990, p.3 
 25. Government Information, Justice, and Agriculture Subcommittee 
 of the Committee on Government Operations, House of 
 Representatives, December 18, 1990, passim. 
 26. Ibid, 
 27. The film, "The Maltese Double Cross" (see below). 
 28. Sunday Times (London), April 16, 1989 (traces); Johnston, op. 
 cit., p.79 (substantial).  "The Maltese Double Cross" film 
 mentions other reports of drugs found, by a Scottish policeman 
 and a mountain rescue man. 
 29. Financial Times (London), May 12, 1995, p.8 and article by 
 John Ashton, leading 103 investigator, in The Mail on Sunday 
 (London), June 9, 1996. 
 30. Ashton, op. cit.; Wall Street Journal, December 18, 1995, 
 p.1, and December 18, 1996, p.B2  
 31. The Guardian (London), April 23, 1994, p.5 
 32. Sunday Times (London), May 7, 1995. 
 33. Francovich's former wife told the author that he had not had 
 any symptoms of a heart problem before.  However, the author also 
 spoke to Dr. Cyril Wecht, of JFK "conspiracy" fame, who performed 
 an autopsy on Francovich.  Wecht stated that he found no reason 
 to suspect foul play. 
 34. Re: Abu Talb, all 1989: New York Times, Oct. 31, p.1, Dec. 1, 
 p.12, Dec. 24, p.1; Sunday Times (London), Nov. 12, p.3, December 
 5; The Times (London), Dec. 21, p.5.  Also The Associated Press, 
 July 11, 2000 
 35. Cadman in "The Maltese Double Cross".  Also see The Guardian, 
 July 29, 1995, p.27 
 36. New York Times, Feb. 2, 2001 
 37. Ibid. 
 38. Electronic Telegraph UK News, February 4, 2001 
 39. All quotations are from Koechler's report of February 3, 
 2001, easily found on the Internet 
 Written by William Blum <bblum6 [at] aol.com>, author of:  
  Killing Hope: US Military and CIA Interventions Since World War II   and 
  Rogue State: A Guide to the World's Only Superpower    This essay is a chapter in the book,  Everything You Know Is Wrong , 
 a sequel to the book  You Are Being Lied To .   Both books are published by Disinformation Books 
 return to beginning    return to homepage   
