 WiMAX, Broadband and Enterprise VPN Products - Aperto Networks

     Contact Us      Products Technology  PacketMAX Family  WaveCenter Family    Solutions License-Exempt WiMAX  3.65 GHz WiMAX  Voice and IMS over WiMAX  Enterprise VPNs &  Business Applications    News Press Releases  Media Coverage  Events  Industry Perspective  Media Kit    Support Customer Support  Services  Customer Downloads  Training  RMA    About Us Contact Us  Corporate Background  Industry Affiliations  Careers       Technology  PacketMAX Family  WaveCenter Family     Wassim El Khoury, Network Expansion Manager, Pesco Lebanon    "We have been an Aperto customer for some time and know that PacketMAX is the ideal solution for our offerings... Like many service providers, we are concerned with the cost of deploying and managing WiMAX... with Aperto's WaveCenter EMS product, PacketMAX lets us serve a huge number of customers with exceptional QoS and reliability."    The Next Generation of Wireless The vision of wireless broadband includes ubiquitous access to a consistent set of content and services at home or on the go that conform to 802.16d standards.  PacketMAX unique technical innovations help attract subscribers and increase revenue opportunities for service providers. In addition to attaining the status of an acknowledged technological innovator, Aperto has led the broadband wireless industry in developing industry standards. Aperto was a founder of the WiMAX Forum, and a founder and lead contributor to IEEE 802.16 and the ETSI-BRAN standards. Aperto PacketMAX® Family  PacketMAX products are designed to meet the demanding capacity, quality, and scalability requirements of today's service providers. Combining Aperto's field-proven wireless broadband technologies and cutting-edge enhancements with robust WiMAX technology, PacketMAX offers a high-capacity platform that maximizes revenue and profits by reliably delivering voice, data, and video for fixed WIMAX. The family includes macro, stackable, and micro base stations for 802.16-2004 based operations. PacketMAX selection of indoor gateways, outdoor gateways and PC adapters allow WiMAX operations suitable for any subscriber environment. Aperto WaveCenter™ EMS Pro  Aperto WaveCenter EMS Pro is a carrier-class management system (EMS) for managing PacketMAX powered wireless broadband networks that conform to the 802.16 standards. The software's intuitive graphical user interface and powerful management tools increase productivity in network operations centers. With the ability to discover and inventory equipment in real time, WaveCenter ensures fast deployment of Aperto equipment and provisioning of customers. Its highly scalable and reliable architecture lets providers deploy and efficiently manage very large networks from a central remote location. Standard interfaces lower the cost and time required for system integration. Aperto supplies northbound interfaced based on CORBA and SOAP/XML.  To request product information,  contact us .      HOME |  CAREERS |  CONTACT |  PRIVACY POLICY       
