 WiMAX, Broadband and Enterprise VPN Products – PacketMAX Family

     Contact Us      Products Technology  PacketMAX Family  WaveCenter Family    Solutions License-Exempt WiMAX  3.65 GHz WiMAX  Voice and IMS over WiMAX  Enterprise VPNs &  Business Applications    News Press Releases  Media Coverage  Events  Industry Perspective  Media Kit    Support Customer Support  Services  Customer Downloads  Training  RMA    About Us Contact Us  Corporate Background  Industry Affiliations  Careers       Technology  PacketMAX Family  WaveCenter Family      Ahmed Ebraheem, Managing Director, MADA Kuwait    "After a thorough evaluation of several wireless broadband solutions providers, we came to the conclusion that Aperto Networks had the most advanced and the most stable platform. We were especially pleased with the Quality of Service and the routing and advanced networking features built into Aperto's platform. Its flexible architecture ensures a future proof evolution as we implement new subscriber services in the coming months and years."      PacketMAX Base Stations PacketMAX 5000 - Fixed Base Station for Fixed WiMAX    PacketMAX™ 5000 holds the distinction of being the industry's first base station certified by the WiMAX Forum. It operates in licensed and license-exempt bands and can host 802.16-2004 subscribers within a single chassis—giving providers a versatile platform from which to launch fixed and nomadic services. Download PDF of Product Brief    PacketMAX 3000 - Fixed WiMAX Base Station   The PacketMAX 3000 delivers Aperto’s industry leading WiMAX technology into a single-sector “stackable” form factor. For service providers seeking entry into the WiMAX market or those expanding coverage of an existing network, the PacketMAX 3000 is an economical and elegant solution. Its space-saving design allows operators a carrier grade platform from which to launch premium voice, multimedia and data services. PacketMAX 3000 leverages Aperto’s WiMAX Forum Certified base station design. Download PDF of Product Brief    PacketMAX 2000 - Fixed WiMAX Pico Base Station   The PacketMAX 2000 delivers cost effective WiMAX technology into a single-sector, all-outdoor form factor. For service providers seeking entry into the emerging WiMAX market where total cost of ownership is of utmost importance, the PacketMAX 2000 is the solution to deliver basic communication services including internet access and VoIP.  Download PDF of Product Brief  Click Here for More Info       HOME |  CAREERS |  CONTACT |  PRIVACY POLICY     
