 The Short List - The West Wing Episode Guide

  T he  W est  W ing Episode Guide -  http://www.westwingepguide.com/ Bookmark this Site  The Short List Original Airdate 11-24-99 Rerun 03-29-00 and 07-11-01  Previous Episode  ||   Season 1 Episode Index  |   Main Index  |   Season 1 Information Index  ||   Next Episode  Descriptions  |   Credits  |   Information Links  |   Media Quotes  Descriptions  From  TVGuide.com :  Just before Bartlet ( Martin Sheen ) is ready to name a Supreme Court nominee, he considers another possible candidate. Meanwhile, there are accusations of drug use among the staff.  From  NBC :  When a Supreme Court justice retires, President Bartlet ( Martin Sheen ) has a golden opportunity to impact the court's composition by nominating a favorite judge ( Ken Howard ) -- but when further study reveals the candidate's conflicting ideology, the President might change his mind and opt for another judge. In addition, a headline seeking congressman ( Holmes Osborne ) on the House Government Oversight Committee accuses the White House staff of substance abuse -- a dicey issue for one important member.   TOP OF PAGE  Credits  Story by  Aaron Sorkin &  Dee Dee Myers  Teleplay by  Aaron Sorkin &  Patrick Caddell  Directed by  Bill D'Elia   Rob Lowe  as  Sam (Samuel Norman) Seaborn Deputy Communications Director  Moira Kelly  as  Mandy (Madeline) Hampton Public Relations Consultant  Dulé Hill  as  Charlie (Charles) Young Personal Aide to the President  Allison Janney  as  C.J. (Claudia Jean) Cregg Press Secretary  Richard Schiff  as  Toby (Tobias Zachary) Ziegler Communications Director  John Spencer  as  Leo Thomas McGarry Chief of Staff  Bradley Whitford  as  Josh (Joshua) Lyman Deputy Chief of Staff  and Martin Sheen  as  Jed (Josiah Edward) Bartlet President of the United States         Guest Starring      Timothy Busfield  as  Danny (Daniel) Concannon (Washington Post) Reporter  Janel Moloney  as  Donna (Donnatella) Moss Assistant to Deputy Chief of Staff  Holmes Osborne  as  Peter Lillienfield Congressman  Special Guest Stars      Mason Adams  as  Joseph Crouch Retiring Supreme Court Justice  Ken Howard  as  Peyton Cabot Harrison III    and Special Appearence By Edward James Olmos  as  Mendoza Justice Roberto         Co-Starring      Kathryn Joosten  as  Mrs. Landingham President's Secretary / Delores (first name)  NiCole Robinson  as  Margaret Hooper (last name) / Assistant to Chief of Staff  Diana Morgan  as  Reporter #1 Jesse  Charles Noland  as  Reporter #2 Steve  Kris Narmont  as  Reporter #3 "Chris" / Katie Witt   Created by  Aaron Sorkin  Music by  W.G. Snuffy Walden  Co-Producer  Michael Hissrich  Producer  Kristin Harms  Consulting Producers  Jeff Reno &  Ron Osborn  Produced by  Llewellyn Wells  Executive Producers  Aaron Sorkin  Thomas Schlamme  John Wells  Co-Producer  Rick Cleveland  Executive Story Editor  Peter Parnell  Executive Story Editor  Lawrence O'Donnell, Jr.  Story Editor  Paul Redford  Consultant Patrick Cadell  Consultant  Dee Dee Meyers  Associate Producer  Julie Herlocker  Director of Photography  Thomas Del Ruth, A.S.C.  Production Designer  Kenneth Hardy  Edited by  Tina Hirsch, A.C.E.  Unit Production Manager  Robert P. Cohen  First Assistant Director  Rodney Hooks  Second Assistant Director  Dylan Massin  Executive in Charge of Casting  Barbara Miller, C.S.A.  Casting by  John Levey, C.S.A.  Kevin Scott, C.S.A.  Costume Designer  Lyn Elizabeth Paolo  Set Decorator  Ellen Totleben  Property Master  Blanche Sindelar  Key Make-up  Greg LaCava  Key Hair  Jeffery Sacino  Camera Operator  Dave Chameides  Gaffer  Jeff Butters  Script Supervisor  Hilary Momberger  Sound Mixer  Kenneth B. Ross  Music Supervisor  Ann Kline  Music Editor  Stuart Goetz  Supervising Sound Editors  Walter Newman  Thomas A. Harris  Re-Recording Mixers  Dan Hiland  Gary D. Rogers  Post Production Supervisor  Kathryn Lekan  Production  225908   TOP OF PAGE  Information Links  Supreme Court  [Senate] Judiciary  Queen's Coronation  Phillips Exeter  Princeton  Rhodes Scholar  Harvard Law Review  Dean of Harvard Law School  " Attorney General for Eisenhower " Harry Truman  "Revealed his thinking on  Roe [v. Wade] " " Schlesinger ,  Sorsenson ,  Rumsfeld and Persons" Ivy League  Random House  Masterpiece Theatre  U.S. Senate  Amicus Briefs  " House Government Oversight Committee " New York Knickerbockers  Judge Black  Constitution  London School of Economics  Sierra Tucson  Constitutional Amendments mentioned: First  Third  Fourth  Fifth  The Bill of Rights  City University of New York  New York Police Academy  Warren Burger  Eastern District [of New York]  TOP OF PAGE  Media Quotes  "I knew that I wanted the...story to start with 'Fantastic, everything's great, we got Mario Cuomo,'" Sorkin recalls. "And to end with 'It's a whole different guy.'  "In other words," Sorkin continues, "we're gonna have to discover a problem with our home-run candidate. I didn't want it to be scandalous at all. I didn't want it to be a nanny. I didn't want it to be sex like with Clarence Thomas. I didn't want this guy to have done anything wrong except that I was intrigued by [Robert] Bork and those who agree with Bork that the Constitution does not provide for a right of privacy, that the right simply doesn't exist. Not so much because of Bork's contention that Roe v. Wade was based on faulty legal thinking but more because I think privacy is huge." Sorkin also knew he wanted the action to take place over just a couple of days. "The more you compress time, the more the heat goes up," he explains. "I was taught that you want to start your stories as close to the end as possible." Sorkin continues, "I'll sit with Pat, Dee Dee, and Lawrence, and I'll say, 'Write me something about this; write me something about how that would work.'" O'Donnell supplied the résumé of the perfect candidate. Caddell researched the privacy arguments. Sorkin asked Myers for ideas on what might undo someone who seemed like the perfect candidate. She came back with the notion of an unsigned "note" (a long scholarly article) the candidate wrote as a young man on the Harvard Law Review that casts doubt on his commitment to privacy rights.  "The Real White House" by Matthew Miller March 2000 Brill's Content Apparently James Olmos heard that they were going to have the White House name a Hispanic to the Supreme Court and begged to let him play the part. "At that point the character was only to appear in that one episode, we never said "'there's more for you down the road,' and that he literally only had about 4 lines, one of which was "'Thank you, Mr. President,' but he didn't care." Then they wrote Celestial Navigation.  Posted at TheWestWing@egroups.com by Jenn September 26, 2000 Message 6797 Notes from the Harvard Law School Forum with Aaron Sorkin Hail to the cheap? NBC's hit West Wing is miserly with its guest stars, says Oscar nominee Edward James Olmos (Stand and Deliver) Olmos, in town last week for PBS's annual meeting, says he was asked to work for scale - about $4,500 per episode - when he did two guests shots as Supreme Court nominee Judge Roberto Mendoza in the '99-2000 season. "West Wing complained when they had to pay me," says Olmos, who stars in the forthcoming PBS drama American Family. "They felt they had a top show, and wouldn't everybody want to do it for nothing? "I said: 'No, I don't do anything for commercial television for nothing. You don't need the help!' I'm a little too expensive for them. You can't ask major talent to come on board without being able to support themselves." NBC referred calls to West Wing producer Warner Bros. Television. Warner Bros. had no comment, but sources close to West Wing say Olmos received "well above scale" for his work. Ironically, perpetually cash- strapped PBS is giving Olmos his "normal fee" for Family, originally developed for CBS by filmmaker Gregory Nava (Selena) "PBS came in strong," says Olmos, 54, who's married to Sopranos shrink Lorraine Bracco. "Obviously, they appreciate my work and my talent, and they're paying me for it."  "PBS pays up more readily than 'West Wing' for Olmos" by Gail Shister June 19, 2001 Philadelphia Inquirer The West Wing's [John] Spencer, sipping on club soda, refers to the parallels between his early alcohol problems and those scripted for White House Chief of Staff Leo McGarry. "It was weird. I really wasn't acting."  "Pitch and catch" by Dusty Saunders January 24, 2004 Rocky Mountain News Co-producer Lawrence O'Don-nell Jr., who came to the show with a political background, knew enough about TV to figure the series had as much chance as a Gary Coleman gubernatorial campaign.  "I was absolutely convinced that it didn't have a chance. No chance," he said. "As far I could tell, in TV terms, nothing happened. It was a bunch of guys in neckties and some nicely dressed women who were arguing and nothing happened." "I was guaranteed 13 episodes of employment and my lifetime budget was based on that at the time."  "'The West Wing' turned dark horse into a champion" by Neal Justin April 21, 2006 Minneapolis-St.Paul Star Tribune "I thought this show didn't have a chance because I really liked it, and I don't usually like TV," [Lawrence] O'Donnell said recently.  "Sun sets on 'West Wing'" by Aaron Barnhart May 14, 2006 Kansas City Star TOP OF PAGE  For more information about this episode: Continuity Guide to "The West Wing"  Previous Episode  |      Main Index     Season 1 Episode Index     Season 1 Information Index  |   Next Episode        
