 Hawaii Volunteer Fire Chiefs Association - Company Info.

                                     14-A  We are North Kohala Coast Volunteer Co. 14-Alpha Our station is located on Ala Kahua dr. in Kohala Ranch , a Private gated subdivision. It is about 1 1/2 miles mauka of AkoniPule Hwy, about 3 miles north of Kawaihae Harbor. The volunteers all live outside of the station area and we need keys to unlock the gate in order to get to our trucks to respond to fire calls. Our official coverage area includes Kawaihae Village to the south and up to Hawi to the north. However, we have responded to calls in the areas of Kohala Mt. road, Waimea (Kamuela), Mana Road (Hawaiian Homesteads), Lalamilo farm lots, South Kohala & north Kona upper road, Waikoloa Village, and as far as Costco in north Kona. I guess we'll go mostly wherever they need us. Our company was formed around 1995, after the big fire that ran right through our subdivision. We now have: a Military Chevy brush truck=250gal, Ford 1973 tanker=1250 gal., Seagrave 1985 Engine=1000 gal. Our company at present consists of 8 firefighter personnel and 6 support people. Ralph Saito, chief and Peter Banks, assistant chief Fire Equipment Operators : Peter Banks, Gerry Reilly, Paul Fischer, Bruce Biddle, Ralph Saito Fire fighters: Robert Rutledge, Marc Kinoshita, Melani Biddle, Dean Hellickson We have 6 support people. Includes Bob Russell, our president and Linda Collison, our CPR & First Aid trainer   19-A  19A Volcano Our station is located approxamately 1/4 mile up Wright Rd. (Highway 148) off Highway 11 just above the 26 mile marker. Our response area is Highway 11 from Akatsuka Orchids (about the 22 mile marker) to the 37 mile marker in Ka'u. The area includes all subdivisions in this area (Volcano Village, Golf Course, Olaa Summer lots, Cymbidium Acres, Farm Lots, Ohia Estates, Maunaloa Estates, Royal Hawaiian Estates and Hawaiian Orchid Isle Estates) as well as the whole Eastern Portion of the Volcanoes National Park. We have a 1988 Amertek 2600 4 wheel drive combination crash fire/structure engine that carries 660 gallons of water and 72 gallons of foam. All members have full wildland PPE's, we also have pumps, forestry hose and brush tools. FEO Tom Reppuhn has 2 wilderness trained SARS dogs trained in tracking and air scent, they are currently being crosstrained for locating cadavers. We are currently only 7 active volunteers; Company Officers (also driver/operators) Vol. Captain - Tom Reppuhn   18-A  18-A Hawaiian Paradise Park Our station is located an the corner of Paradise Drive and 21st Street in HPP. District 18 is all of Paradise Park and Orchidland Estates up to 40th Street and Tiki Gardens. The area is about 45 square miles with a population of around 13,000. We have a 1967 Ford 1200 Gallon Tanker and a 1997 Chevy Brush Truck with 100 gallons of water both are class A foam capable. We have 12 Volunteer Firefighters in the company at this time.  Company Officers  Doug Keown Chief Mike McMillan Assistant Chief Volunteer Fire Equipment Operators  Andrew Coyne Francis Blas    1-A  Pepeekeo Volunteer Fire Company 1A, was reorganized after the closing of the Hilo Coast Processing Co.(Pepeekeo Sugar Co.) in 1991. In 1996, Company 1A received a new Fire Engine thru a CDBG grant, that the now retired Fire Chief Nelson Tsuji had applied for. A one acre parcel was donated to the County, for the purpose of building a permanent Fire Station for the volunteers. The location is mauka of Hwy. 19 on Kumula Street, in Pepeekeo. Coordinator, Toni Bello than applied for a CDBG grant, for the materials needed to build the new station. In 1997, the Fire Station was completed with the help of, donations from different vendors / businesses, labor from contractors, H.C.C. and volunteers from the community. The Fire Station was built with a lot of BLOOD, SWEAT, and TEARS, and not to mention, under $60.000. Fire district for 1A covers from, North at Chin Chuck Rd. in Wailea, to just South of Papaikou. In the past 16 years, 1A has been called to assist with incidents around the entire island. Co. 1A is comprised of a dedicated core group of Volunteers. Officers: Carlton Bello Clinton Haina Alan Mitsuyoshi Glenn Yoshizawa VFF: Russell Kaneko Toni Bello Monica Yoshizawa Fire Equipment: Year: 1996 Make: 3D Type: Cab over Frontline Pumper Eng: 500hp Cummins Pump: 1500gpm Cap: 1000gal. 40gal. ea. of type A & B Foam   10- B  Volunteer Company 10 Bravo is based in Wa’a Wa’a, which is small coastal community located on the Old Government Beach Road midway between the Hawaiian Beaches and Kapoho developments.We built a new firehouse at;14-372 Pakaka rd., Wa'a Wa'a subdivision At the time of the Dana Ireland murder in 1991, Wa’a Wa’a was an isolated area and timely emergency services were not available. In response to residents’ concerns that there was no emergency response organization in Wa’a Wa’a, Company 10-Bravo volunteer fire department was born. We began with nine members, trained by Captain Lloyd Narimatsu and Sgt. Eddie Wong. Over the years, we’ve had as many as 15 members, and at present we have ten. We drive a GMC brush truck on loan from the U.S. Forestry Service. Although it only carries 500 gallons of water, we have the equipment to draft from catchment tanks in Wa’a Wa’a. Over the years, we’ve responded to a wide variety of calls ranging from Hawaiian Beaches to Kalapana. Here in Wa’a Wa’a, we are often the first on scene if there is a medical emergency or fisherman in distress.  Ten Bravo is a group with many talents. Reva Collins, wife of one of our founding members, composed a song in honor of our dedication. Here it is….ask any of us to sing it! We are the Wa’a Wa’a volunteer Firewomen and men When they call us, they call us BRAVO TEN (we’re a ten) We don’t want limp hoses They won’t put out the fire We don’t want limp hoses  As the flames are getting higher (higher, higher) The Captain told us we would die like rats We wear 30 pounds of clothing on our backs We train and train and train some more Saving lives and land is what it’s for * * * We’ve learned to use equipment and memorize codes We’ve learned to work together to control a hose We’ve learned how to haul somebody down a ladder Saving lives and land it what really matters * * * Rebecca, John and Shelly Dallas and Dean Lui, Michael, Wesley and Bill are a team Captain Narimatsu brought them through He’s the volunteer fireperson’s guru!   11-A  We are Volunteer Company 11-Alpha of Naalehu. We don’t have a place yet to call ours. We just kinda go from here to there, currently housed in the parking lot behind the Naalehu ace hardware. Thanks to Shane store manager and the owners. We basically support an area between Pahala including wood-valley to south-point, up to kapapala on hwy 11 to ocean-view. You got to respect the work these regular’s do, although I’ve inhaled my share of smoke.   11 D  11 Delta is located in Pahala, Hawaii. This Company has been to fires as far away as the Puna district to the north and Ocean View on the south. There are currently 8 extremely dedicated to the community volunteers in this company. Ron Ebert is the Chief and FEO Margaret Ann Cabado Assistant Chief Bob Kovach FF Dona Kovach FF Jarred Yates FF Liz Polido FF Phil Becker FF Ezra Keohuloin FF Our current apparatus is a 1967 Chevrolet which due to the age and condition is housed at the Chiefs home. His TLC has kept it going through the last several fire seasons. We are hoping the current apparatus will be replaced soon with a newer more reliable model. We are in the process of getting a shed to house our equipment. A steel building is on order and once received and constructed will greatly aid in the preservation of our equipment   11-C, DISCOVERY HARBOUR  HVFD Engine Company 11-Charlie, based in the Big Island community of Discovery Harbour, covers South Point and the surrounding areas, frequently responding to local fires with Regular and Volunteer units from Pahala, Ocean View, and Na’alehu. PERSONNEL: Ralph Anderson Terri Darr Christie Eggers TJ James Rollie Litteral Scott Stabo EQUIPMENT: 1972 International Loadstar 1700 pump truck; 750 gal. water capacity; 2 booster and 2 attack lines; portable foam pack. CONTACT INFO.: TJ James – Cell: 895-8133 DHVFD Physical Address: - 94-1604 Makali’I St., Discovery Harbour, Na’alehu, HI 96772 DHVFD Mailing Address: c/o T. James, P.O Box 706, Na’alehu, HI 96772.            Make your own website    
