 MWH Awarded Three Ohio Hydroelectric Projects -- re> CHICAGO, June 4 /PRNewswire/ --

     See more news releases in:  Oil & Energy ,  Construction & Building ,  Environmental Products & Services ,  Contracts          MWH Awarded Three Ohio Hydroelectric Projects            New Facilities on Ohio River Will Add to State's Renewable Energy Generation Portfolio   
    CHICAGO, June 4 /PRNewswire/ -- MWH, a global provider of environmental
 engineering, construction and strategic consulting services, announced
 today that it has been selected by American Municipal Power-Ohio (AMP-Ohio)
 to serve as the Owner's Engineer for the design and construction of three
 new hydroelectric projects on the Ohio River. All three facilities will be
 located at existing locks and dams and will have a combined generation
 capacity of 191 megawatts (MW).
     "Our past work with MWH on the Belleville Hydroelectric Plant makes us
 confident that MWH is an excellent company to oversee these three projects.
 They will help protect the interests of AMP-Ohio and ensure that these
 facilities are well engineered, safe and efficient," said Marc Gerken, PE,
 president and CEO of AMP-Ohio. MWH designed AMP-Ohio's Belleville
 Hydroelectric Plant, which produces 42 MW of energy and has been in
 operation since 1999.
     As the Owner's Engineer, MWH will provide a range of multi-disciplinary
 services for the design and construction of the projects including:
 preliminary engineering, site surveying, geotechnical investigations,
 hydraulic model studies, turbine/generator procurement, detailed design and
 preparation of bid documents, bidding support, engineering services during
 construction and resident engineering services.
     "These facilities will help AMP-Ohio keep up with growing energy
 demands in the region and, because all three facilities will be built at
 existing locks and dams, the environmental impact will be minimal," said
 Craig Harris, project manager at MWH.
     The first project will be located on the West Virginia shore at the
 Willow Island locks and dam, approximately 42 miles upstream from the
 Belleville Plant. New facilities will include a two-unit powerhouse with an
 estimated generation capacity of 35 MW. This plant will produce
 approximately 195,000 megawatt-hours (MWh) annually.
     The second project will be located at Cannelton locks and dam near
 Cannelton, Ind. The largest of the three projects, Cannelton will have a
 capacity of 84 MW. This three-unit plant is expected to generate an average
 of 390,000 MWh annually.
     The third project will be located on the Kentucky shore at the existing
 Smithland locks and dam in Livingston County, Ky. Projected to be a three-
 unit, 72 MW plant, the Smithland project will generate an average of
 340,000 MWh annually.
     The use of conventional bulb turbine technology is planned for all
 three sites.
     About AMP-Ohio
     AMP-Ohio is the Columbus, Ohio-based nonprofit wholesale power supplier
 and services provider for 121 member municipal electric systems in Ohio,
 Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia and Michigan. The organization
 provides a diverse mix in its wholesale generation resources, which in
 addition to fossil fuel, includes wind, hydroelectric, landfill gas and
 distributed generation.
     MWH's Dam and Hydropower Services
     MWH has been providing engineering services to the dam and hydropower
 sector since 1920 and is currently working on numerous dam and hydropower
 projects throughout North and South America, Europe, Asia and Africa. MWH
 has played a key role in some of the largest dam and hydropower projects in
 the world, including the Three Gorges Dam in China, Ghazi Barotha
 Hydroelectric Scheme in Pakistan, Mohale Dam in Lesotho, Tekeze Dam in
 Ethiopia, Caruachi Hydroelectric Project in Venezuela and Karahnjukar
 Hydroelectric Project in Iceland.
     About MWH
     Headquartered in Broomfield, Colo., MWH is a private, employee-owned
 firm with approximately 6,000 employees worldwide. The company provides
 water, wastewater, energy, natural resource, program management, consulting
 and construction services to industrial, municipal and government clients
 in the Americas, Europe, Middle East, India, Asia and the Pacific Rim. For
 more information about MWH, please visit the company's Web site at
 www.mwhglobal.com.
 
   SOURCE MWH

  Back to top     Next in Oil & Energy News   Custom Packages Browse our custom packages or build your own to meet your unique communications needs. Start today.     PR Newswire Membership Fill out a PR Newswire membership form or contact us at (888) 776-0942.  Learn about PR Newswire services Request more information about PR Newswire products and services or call us at (888) 776-0942.       My News   Featured Video      Print  Email    RSS  Share it          Google                                                       Blog it                        WordPress Blog URL:                      Blog Search                  More in These Categories Oil & Energy  Apache Corporation Selects tw telecom to Build Advanced Business Ethernet Network   TBSS International, Inc. Announces Trading Symbol Change to "TBSS" to Reflect New Corporate Name and Business Plan   Aviso de Webcast: A CPFL Energia S.A. convida para a Webcast de sua Teleconferência sobre os Resultados do Terceiro Trimestre de 2011     Contracts  NCAR Advances Weather Research Capabilities With IBM Supercomputing Technology   Apache Corporation Selects tw telecom to Build Advanced Business Ethernet Network   Servier enters into a Type 2 Diabetes partnership with Canadian firm Prognomix Inc.     Most Read  Nov 03, 2011, 08:15 ET  Eon Productions, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios and Sony Pictures Entertainment Announce 7th November Is Start of Production for 23rd James Bond Film "SKYFALL"  May 13, 2006, 01:00 ET  Xinhua Finance CEO Ms. Fredy Bush Awarded Ellis Island Medal of Honor  Nov 07, 2011, 09:18 ET  LegalShield Announces 2011 WOW Service Awards   View all   Most Emailed  Oct 04, 2011, 15:58 ET  Anti-Bully Ambassadors, Casey and Bella, Launch Free Bully Prevention Resources and Anti-Bully Curriculum for Schools  Nov 03, 2011, 08:00 ET  Chobani® to Invest Over $100 Million to Open New Facility in Idaho  Oct 31, 2011, 17:37 ET  Radio Host Michael Baisden Invests in Small Businesses with 'Million Dollar Business Pitch' Campaign   View all       Journalists and Bloggers  Visit   PR Newswire for Journalists  for releases, photos, ProfNet experts, and customized feeds just for Media. View and download archived video  content distributed by MultiVu on   The Digital Center  . Free Investing Newsletter from Investor Uprising!  Learn to navigate the world's financial system and profit from leading companies.      Register for   Investor Uprising  , the people's investment site, for a free weekly newsletter, information, education and premium research including our latest IU Confidential Report - "  All The Glitters: The Ultimate Gold Report  ".        Advanced Search Search        Products & Services       News Releases        Close                     Send a release   Member sign in   Become a member   For journalists   For bloggers   Global sites       Products & Services  Knowledge Center  Browse News Releases  Contact PR Newswire     About PR Newswire  Contact PR Newswire  PR Newswire's Terms of Use Apply  Careers  Privacy  Site Map  RSS Feeds  Blog   Copyright © 2011 PR Newswire Association LLC. All Rights Reserved. A  UBM plc company. Dynamic Site Platform powered by Limelight Networks.   Become a member  Become a partner  Call us        Request more information  Send us feedback    Online Member Center  MEDIAtlas  Media Monitoring  ProfNet  My News for Investors    Asia  Brazil  Canada  Europe  France  Israel  Mexico  Netherlands  United Kingdom     
