 Oceanographic vessels to conduct Canadian banks surveys

   Original Source:  Fish Information & Services     Oceanographic vessels to conduct Canadian banks surveys   SPAIN  Tuesday, May 26, 2009, 01:10 (GMT + 9)  By Analia Murias   Researchers of the Spanish Oceanography Institute (IEO) on board the Spanish oceanographic research vessels  Vizconde de Eza and  Miguel Oliver will carry out a series of studies evaluating the vulnerable state of fisheries resources and their ecosystems in the great banks of Newfoundland, Canada.   The group of IEO scientists will count on the cooperation of colleagues from Canada, Russia, the United Kingdom and Portugal and develop several simultaneous oceanographic campaigns over three months, during which they will study more than 10,669 sq km of the marine bottom and carry out 450 fishing catches.   Last 16 May the vessel  Miguel Oliver set sail followed by the  Vizconde de Eza on the 24 of the same month. Both vessels belong to the General Secretariat of the Sea (SGM), a dependency of the Ministry of Environment and Rural Affairs (MARM).   The primary targets of the surveys are to locate sensitive benthonic habitats and evaluate their possible interactions with fishing activities. Each supposes "a scientific effort without precedent," the IEO stated.   The research studies will be developed parallelly in the area regulated by the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation (NAFO) and within the limits of Canada’s exclusive economic zone.   The first survey, Platuxa 2009, is the fifteenth conducted by the IEO in Canadian waters and the ninth on board the  Vizconde de Eza .  The study is directed by the Distant Fisheries Team of the IEO’s Oceanographic Centre in Vigo, and targets the following species: Greenland halibut ( Reinhardtius hippoglossoides ), American flounder ( Hippoglossoides platessoides ), yellowtail flounder ( ferruginea Limanda ), Atlantic cod ( Gadus morhua ), redfish ( Sebastes spp ), witch flounder ( Glyptocephalus cynoglossus ), roughhead grenadier ( Macrourus berglax ), spottail spiny turbot ( Anarhichas sp ), ray ( radiata Amblyraja ), black shark ( Centroscyllium fabricii ) and the Northern prawn ( Pandalus borealis ).   Platuxa 2009 will be carried out in the 3N and 3O divisions of the NAFO-regulated area between 31 May and 21 June. Meanwhile, from 21 June to 23 July, the scientists on board the same ship will carry out the Flemish CAP 2009 survey, which will be the twenty-second in the bank area of the same name (3M division of NAFO area).  There, the abundance of demersal fish populations will be estimated, and the structure and diverse biological parametres of the major species will be analysed. Experts from the Vigo Marine Research Institute (IIM-CSIC) and Portugal's Sea and Fishing Research Institute (IPIMAR) will also take part in the survey.  The  Vizconde de Eza will also partake in the Greenland halibut survey, from 24 July to 21 August, the IEO indicated.   These survey series are funded by the European Commission (EC) under the National Basic Data Programme.Meanwhile, the  Miguel Oliver vessel will develop three oceanographic surveys in the same area to locate vulnerable ecosystems threatened by fishing practices that are in need of protection.   The scientists will study the geomorphology of the marine bottom in search of singular structures, like submarine mounts and hydrothermal sources; the bottoms will be sampled and photos of invertebrates like cold water coral, sponges and gorgonians will be taken. 
