 Ariel Sharon

     Ariel Sharon  (1928- )  Ariel (“Arik”) Sharon was born at Kfar Malal on February 27, 1928. He served in the  IDF for more than 25 years, retiring with the rank of Major-General. He holds an LL.B in Law from the  Hebrew University of Jerusalem (1962). He joined the  Haganah at the age of 14 in 1942. During the  1948 War of Independence , he commanded an infantry company in the Alexandroni Brigade. In 1953, he founded and led the “101” special commando unit which carried out retaliatory operations against Palestinian  fedayeen . Sharon was appointed commander of a  Paratroop Corps in 1956 and fought in the  Sinai Campaign . In 1957, he attended the Camberley Staff College in Great Britain. During 1958-62, Sharon served as Infantry Brigade Commander and then Infantry School Commander, and attended Law School at  Tel Aviv University . He was appointed Head of the Northern Command Staff in 1964 and Head of the Army Training Department in 1966. He participated in the  1967 Six Day War as commander of an armored division. In 1969 he was appointed Head of the Southern Command Staff.  Sharon resigned from the army in June 1972, but was recalled to active military service in the 1973  Yom Kippur War to command an armored division. He led the crossing of the Suez Canal which helped secure an Israeli victory in the war and eventual  peace with Egypt . Ariel Sharon was elected to the  Knesset in December 1973, but resigned a year later, serving as Security Adviser to Prime Minister  Yitzhak Rabin (1975). He was elected to the  Knesset in 1977 on the Shlomzion ticket. Following the elections, he joined the  Herut party and was appointed Minister of Agriculture in  Menachem Begin's first government (1977-81). One of his priorities was to pursue agricultural cooperation with  Egypt . In 1981, Ariel Sharon was appointed Defense Minister, serving in this post during the  Lebanon War , which brought about the destruction of the  PLO terrorist infrastructure in  Lebanon . In the realm of international relations, he was instrumental in renewing diplomatic relations with the African nations which had broken off ties with Israel during the  Yom Kippur War . In November 1981, he brought about the first  strategic cooperation agreement with the U.S. and widened defense ties between Israel and many nations. He also helped bring thousands of Jews from  Ethiopia through  Sudan . In 1983, Sharon resigned as Defense Minister after a  government commission found him indirectly responsible for the September 1982 massacre of Palestinians at the  Sabra and Shatila refugee camps by Lebanese Phalangists. Sharon remained in the government as a minister without portfolio and then served as Minister of Industry and Trade from 1984-90. In this capacity, he concluded the  Free Trade Agreement with the U.S. in 1985.  From 1990-1992, he served as Minister of Construction and Housing and Chairman of the Ministerial Committee on Immigration and Absorption. Following the fall of the Soviet Union and the waves of  immigration from Russia , he initiated and carried out a program to absorb the immigrants throughout the country, including the construction of 144,000 apartments. From 1992-1996, he served as a member of the  Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee. In 1996, Ariel Sharon was appointed Minister of National Infrastructure and was involved in fostering joint ventures with  Jordan ,  Egypt and the  Palestinians . He also served as Chairman of the Ministerial Committee for  Bedouin advancement. In 1998, Ariel Sharon was appointed  Foreign Minister and headed the  permanent status negotiations with the  Palestinian Authority . While serving as Foreign Minister, Sharon met with U.S., European, Palestinian and Arab leaders to advance the peace process. He worked mostly to create and advance projects such as the Flagship Water Project funded by the international community to find a long-term solution to the region's  water crisis and a basis to peaceful relations between Israel, Jordan, the Palestinians and other Middle Eastern countries. Following the election of  Ehud Barak as Prime Minister in May 1999, Ariel Sharon was called upon to become interim  Likud party leader following the resignation of  Benjamin Netanyahu . In September 1999, he was elected Chairman of the  Likud . He also served as a member of the Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee in the  Knesset . On September 28, 2000, Sharon made a visit to the  Temple Mount in  Jerusalem , the holiest place in  Judaism to emphasize Israel's claim to sovereignty over the Temple Mount. Palestinians maintained that Sharon came with “thousands of Israeli soldiers” and defiled a Muslim holy place, when in fact, Israel's Internal Security Minister  Shlomo Ben-Ami permitted Sharon to visit the Temple Mount only after calling Palestinian security chief  Jabril Rajoub and receiving his assurance that if Sharon did not enter the mosques, no problems would arise. Sharon did not attempt to enter any mosques and his 34 minute visit was conducted during normal hours when the area is open to tourists. Palestinian youths — eventually numbering around 1,500 — shouted slogans in an attempt to inflame the situation. Some 1,500 Israeli police were present at the scene to forestall violence. Following Sharon's Temple Mount visit, the Palestinians, under the direction of  Yasser Arafat , launched an unprecendented wave of violence and terror against Israelis, dubbed the “ al-Aksa Intifada ” by the Palestinians for its association with the  al-Aksa Mosque located on the Temple Mount. Palestinian leaders claim that Sharon's visit sparked the violence, but on November 7, 2000, an investigatory committee led by former U.S. Senator George Mitchell was established to determine the causes of the violence and to make recommendations for calming the situation.  The Mitchell Report issued in April 30, 2001, concluded “the Sharon visit did not cuase the “al-Aksa intifada.” In a  special election held February 6, 2001, Ariel Sharon was elected Prime Minister. He presented his government to the  Knesset on March 7, 2001. After calling early elections to the  16th Knesset , which were held on January 28, 2003, Ariel Sharon was charged by the president with the task of forming a government and presented his new government to the Knesset on February 27, 2003. After several years of bloodshed, terror, and stalled peace talks with the Palestinians, Sharon devised a bold  plan that would ensure a higher degree of security for Israelis, and improve the lives of Palestinians. While Palestinian  terrorism against Israelis was at its peak, and going virtually unchecked by Arafat and other Palestinian leaders, Sharon decided that Israel should act unilaterally to improve its security situation and reduce bloodshed. This plan, known as the  disengagement plan , called for the complete withdrawal of Israeli troops and settlers in the  Gaza Strip , as well as the dismantlement of all  settlements in the area, including four settlements in northen  Samaria . Between August 16 and August 30, 2005, Israel safely evacuated more than 8,500 Israeli settlers and, on September 11, 2005, Israeli soldiers left Gaza, ending Israel's 38-year presence in the area.  The implementation of the disengagement plan was viewed as a success by most of the Israeli public, although it sparked bitter protests from ministers of Sharon's Likud Party, causing a party schism. Facing bitter infighting in Likud, Sharon formally resigned from the party to form a  new centrist party , “Kadima,” or “Forward” on November 21, 2005. Following the Likud Party spilt, Sharon outlined the goals of his new party. One, he said, is to closely follow the United States-backed  road map plan for peace with the Palestinians. Sharon declared that there will be no more unilateral withdrawals from the West Bank, and insisted that Palestinian terrorist groups be disarmed and dismantled. The Kadima party platform calls for “maximum security and assuring that Israel be a Jewish national home and that another state that shall arise be demilitarized, with terrorists disarmed.” In mid-December, 2005, Sharon spent two days in a hospital after suffering a minor stroke, which doctors said caused no irreparable brain damage. However, on January 4, 2006, Sharon was rushed to the hospital following another, more serious stroke. Sharon suffered a massive brain hemorrhage, which caused extensive cerebral bleeding.  President  George W. Bush said that Sharon was “a man of courage and peace,” and that “on behalf of all Americans, we send our best wishes and hopes to the prime minister and his family.” Prime Minsterial duties were turned over to  Ehud Olmert , who held a cabinet meeting on January 5, 2006, to signal the transfer of power. Olmert was subsequently elected Prime Minister until  elections on March 28, 2006. Sharon remains hospitalized and is not expected to recover from his illness.  Ariel Sharon has been present at or involved in nearly every seminal moment in modern Israel's history. From pre-state Israel and  Israel's wars of survival, to politics and the disengagement plan, Sharon has played a highly significant role in shaping Israel's future. Although once considered a hardline politician who was the “father of the settlement movement,” and a brilliant leader in the wartime, Sharon devoted his last years in politics to pursuing peace with security for Israel and its neighbors. Sharon is widowed and has two sons, Omri and Gilad. Sources:  Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs ;Leslie Susser, “In Israel, sifting the aftermath of Sharon’s political earthquake,”  JTA , (November 21 & 29, 2005); Scott Wilson, “Israeli Premier Quits Party and Forms His Own,”   The Washington Post ,  (November 22, 2005);  Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs ; Gil Hoffman and JPost staff, “Sharon gets boost to new party,”   The Jerusalem Post ,  (November 22, 2005); Herb Keinon, Gil Hoffman and JPost staff, “Sharon still in very serious condition, vital signs stable,”   The Jerusalem Post  , (January 5, 2006); Photo © Ron Sachs         
