 Rousimar Palhares Vs ? (according to wikipedia...)

 Rousimar Palhares Vs ? (according to wikipedia...) MMAPlayground.com » MMA General »  UFC Forum » Rousimar Palhares Vs ? (according to wikipedia...)   jjeans 11/9/10 5:19:50AM  I am taking account that the resource is from Wikipedia But according to it  Rousamir Palhares Is fighting Hector Lombard at UFC 127 I am going to believe this is not at all confirmed, i am just wondering if anybody even knows if Lombard is in talks of a contract?   AchillesHeel 11/9/10 7:56:26AM  This, boys n' girls, is why your teacher says Wikipedia can't be used as a primary source.    gartface 11/9/10 8:15:49AM  Posted by AchillesHeel This, boys n' girls, is why your teacher says Wikipedia can't be used as a primary source.    You have to know how to use Wikipedia. There are usually these little reference notes that take you to the real source of information, usually credible.  Lesson to you still in college. If your teacher tells you not to use Wikipedia, scroll down to the bottom of the page and just use the reference notes. They won't know.   AchillesHeel 11/9/10 10:36:01AM  Posted by gartface Posted by AchillesHeel This, boys n' girls, is why your teacher says Wikipedia can't be used as a primary source.    You have to know how to use Wikipedia. There are usually these little reference notes that take you to the real source of information, usually credible.  Lesson to you still in college. If your teacher tells you not to use Wikipedia, scroll down to the bottom of the page and just use the reference notes. They won't know.   But that's not using Wikipedia as a primary source. Those links you're citing are, hopefully, the primary sources. And I freakin' hope that  college students don't need to be told not to use Wikipedia as a primary source. I was thinking of high school kids.    DCRage 11/9/10 12:13:17PM  And evidently said mention of Lombard fight has been removed from the page, if it ever was there. Although kudos to whoever did put "Paul Harris" as one of his other names.   Chael_Sonnen 11/9/10 2:46:21PM  Wikipedia is the Ed Soares of useful information.   BlueSkiesBurn 11/9/10 4:05:09PM  Posted by AchillesHeel But that's not using Wikipedia as a primary source. Those links you're citing are, hopefully, the primary sources. And I freakin' hope that  college students don't need to be told not to use Wikipedia as a primary source.   Nope, I've had a couple students turn in papers using Wikipedia as a primary source. I'm of the opinion that college students are actually getting dumber.   AchillesHeel 11/9/10 6:26:52PM  Posted by BlueSkiesBurn Posted by AchillesHeel But that's not using Wikipedia as a primary source. Those links you're citing are, hopefully, the primary sources. And I freakin' hope that  college students don't need to be told not to use Wikipedia as a primary source.   Nope, I've had a couple students turn in papers using Wikipedia as a primary source. I'm of the opinion that college students are actually getting dumber.     Jackelope 11/9/10 7:05:16PM  The problem isn't wikipedia itself. There is plenty of good information to be gained off a site like Wikipedia. The problem is that facts aren't backed up from other sources by the researchers to prove that what they read on Wikipedia was, in fact, fact.  I think it's asinine for anyone to say that Wikipedia can NEVER be a good source. You just have to be diligent about your research and make sure you're not listing something that was completely pulled out of someone's ass. As a matter of fact I would challenge people to question the sources they pull from in books or magazine just as much as they question Wikipedia.   BlueSkiesBurn 11/9/10 7:50:13PM  Posted by Jackelope The problem isn't wikipedia itself. There is plenty of good information to be gained off a site like Wikipedia. The problem is that facts aren't backed up from other sources by the researchers to prove that what they read on Wikipedia was, in fact, fact.  I think it's asinine for anyone to say that Wikipedia can NEVER be a good source. You just have to be diligent about your research and make sure you're not listing something that was completely pulled out of someone's ass. As a matter of fact I would challenge people to question the sources they pull from in books or magazine just as much as they question Wikipedia.   It's not Wikipedia, books, or magazines that are the problem. As Achilles was stating, it's that they often aren't primary sources. You're completely right, Jackelope, Wikipedia can be a very good launching point for getting your research going and verifying sources, however, it's not a primary source.  Teaching student to delineate between that which can be cited and that which can be used to help with your research is the biggest problem that instructors have. Often times they are not clear about what makes a primary source or a secondary source.  Most students these days will consider a work cited in another scholarly work a primary source when, in fact, it's a refereed secondary source. It's about knowing how to check other's references and verify that you can eventually prove that it is a primary source.  Most students can't or won't do this.  Also, the biggest problem with Wikipedia, as compared to books and magazines, is that anybody can change the information at any time on Wikipedia. Once you purchase a book or magazine you have a tangible object that cannot be changed. This does not mean that the information you receive in a book or a magazine is correct by any stretch of the imagination.  Most of the books written by David Irving on the subject of the Holocaust were, at one time, considered scholarly works that were taught in classrooms across all academic levels. Nobody bothered to check the veracity of his claims until Deborah Lipstadt began digging a little and called him a Holocaust denier. This led to a trial where famous historian Richard J. Evans began to examine EVERY source that Irving had ever cited and proved in a court of law that he had, indeed, plagiarized and was a Holocaust denier. Not even two years prior to this trial this man's "authority" on the events of the Holocaust were considered good enough to teach American students. There's a book written by the man who proved Irving was a liar during this entire saga called Lying About Hitler by Richard Evans.  So, yes, students should check everything. For the record, though, most college professors do not consider magazine any more acceptable in a paper than a Wikipedia reference.   Jackelope 11/10/10 9:12:48AM  Posted by BlueSkiesBurn So, yes, students should check everything. For the record, though, most college professors do not consider magazine any more acceptable in a paper than a Wikipedia reference.   I'm talking about research magazines and business journals that actually do case studies and the like. Not sports illustrated opinion pieces or anything, lol   prozacnation1978 11/10/10 9:40:21AM  i have gone on their for over a year now  its pretty accurate but yes sometimes like this case it isnt but i do believe pal harris will be on the ufc 127 card yes just not against lombard   BlueSkiesBurn 11/10/10 4:13:33PM  Posted by Jackelope I'm talking about research magazines and business journals that actually do case studies and the like. Not sports illustrated opinion pieces or anything, lol   We just call those journals    cowcatcher 11/10/10 4:52:57PM  i got banned from contributing to wikipedia a few years back when everyone could just add what they wanted to topics because i happen to have the same name as a little known baseball player and changed the article. i just put some stuff in there about me like "possibly the greatest man ever to live, definitely the greatest most that know him have ever met" and just random accomplishments that no one could have ever done. needless to say, from then on i knew not to believe anything on there without checking into it further.    Related Topics  UFC Fight Night 22 recap: Slippery Marquardt TKOs Palhares in headliner  Rousimar Palhares Doesn't Want To Hurt Opponents, He Wants To Finish Them Quickly  Alessio Sakara vs. Rousimar Palhares set for UFC 101  Rousimar Palhares v. Alessio Sakara at ufc 99  Rousimar Palhares: It's Time To Test Myself-Let The Best Fighters Come  Nate Marquardt vs. Rousimar Palhares moved to UFC Fight Night 22 main-event slot     
