 Radio Station Bans Carrie Underwood After Husband’s Hockey Trade « www.9u8.org

     www.9u8.org  share news for us!  Hot News    Adam Lambert Makes Out With a Scissor Sister (VIDEO) And Other News     Mel Gibson — Doting Daddy!     Jennifer Love Hewitt Opens up to Ellen     Taylor Swift Fears Heart Attack!     Tuesday Night Hanging Laundry Links!     Review | Little People, Big World    Latest News    Mariah Carey’s Husband: I Am Ready to Be a Dad     How to Bring the Hamptons to Your Home Celebrations     Bret Michaels Released From Hospital     Bachelorette Jillian Harris: Jake Pavelka Should Pick Tenley     Monjack Seeking $1,000 Donations to Attend Brittany Murphy Event     Joan Jett: Kristen Stewart Did “Amazing Job” Portraying Me in The Runaways    Meta Log in  RSS Feed  Comments RSS      Radio Station Bans Carrie Underwood After Husband’s Hockey Trade  Celebrity Blog   Credit: Jeff Kravitz/FilmMagic Don’t expect to hear “Before He Cheats” or “Casanova Cowboy” on Kiss 105.3 FM — ever. The Ottawa radio station banned all Carrie Underwood songs from its airwaves after her hockey star husband, native Canadian  Mike Fisher, was traded from the Ottawa Senators to her hometown’s Nashville Predators. PHOTOS: Carrie and Mike’s romance Kiss 105.3 called the big-time move a “betrayal to our community” and charged that he “was lured away from Ottawa by a country-music superstar.” But maybe they weren’t serious? Fisher, 30, isn’t amused. “I heard about it right away and Carrie heard about it and she was extremely disappointed and frustrated,” the star athlete told the Vancouver Sun. “I think they meant it as a joke that really wasn’t funny.” PHOTOS: Love lives of athletes “I don’t know if it was for attention or not, but obviously Carrie had nothing to do with the move or the trade or anything so to imply something like that was just wrong,” said Fisher, who wed Underwood, 27, in rural Georgia in July. As for the move to Nashville? “To be honest, I was praying a few days before about it,” he says. PHOTOS: Stars gone country “I was just so frustrated and said ‘God, if you have me go somewhere take care of it, look after it,’ and he sure did that,” Fisher revealed. And life in the country music capital is great, he added. “He put me in a place I was comfortable with and I think that’s part of reason that this is the place I’m supposed to be and that’s comforting for sure.”    Year-End Movies Poll Results     Penelope Cruz: ‘I’m Not Scared of Getting Older!’     I Would Revisit/Abandon: ‘The X-Files’     Short Thoughts on the Oscar-Nominated Short Films     Teen Mom Star Farrah: I Worry I “Can’t Do It All on My Own”     The Spirit of Fulci Lives in This Awesome ‘Zombi’ Model    Related Posts    Christopher Lee to Narrate Stop-Motion Film Tribute to Tim Burton [Video]     Paris Hilton at Volkswagen’s Concept SUV Tiguen Premiere (11/28/06)     KATIE HOLMES PROVIDED COSTARS WITH CUPCAKES AND COFFEE!     Carrie Underwood In New York City (10/25/7)     Sidney Lumet Dead: Director Sidney Lumet Passes Away at 86     Michael Douglas ‘Goes Head-to-Head With Sex and the City’     Five Ways to Save Joss Whedon     ‘Things Fall Apart’ for 50 Cent     Ryan Phillippe Suicidal After Split With Reese Witherspoon     Dumb & Dumber Rise From the Ashes – Levi Johnston & Jon Gosselin Buddy Up!!     Taylor Swift Will be Unpredictable     10. The ‘American Werewolf in London’ Transformation – 20 Most Iconic Horror Scenes     Author:  www.9u8.org on  November 17, 2011   Category:   News    Newer:  Get Jennifer Aniston’s Soft Smoky Eyes and Golden Glow  Older:  NJ Housewives’ Teresa Slams Pal on Premiere    Last articles Shannon Elizabeth, Derek Hough Split  Brad Pitt, Angelina Jolie Take Boys Shopping for Gerbils  Lindsay Lohan Gets the Axe From Porn Biopic  Review | Ugly Betty  Source: Elin Woods “Possibly” Attending Masters  Gerard Butler Heating Up With French TV Host  Ex Bandmate: Wyclef Jean Isn’t Qualified to Be Haiti’s President  Review | Scrubs, Season 9  Get Jennifer Aniston’s Soft Smoky Eyes and Golden Glow  Radio Station Bans Carrie Underwood After Husband’s Hockey Trade      www.9u8.org  2011.   WikiWP theme, powe red by  Chereshka &  WordPress .   |    RSS  x5y5.com Celebrity Blog       
