 Natalie Portman

  Natalie Portman 2008/9 Schools Wikipedia Selection . Related subjects:  Actors, models and celebrities  Natalie Portman    Portman at the 2006  Berlin International Film Festival, presenting   V for Vendetta .   Born Natalie Hershlag ( Hebrew : נטלי הרשלג)  June 9,  1981  ( 1981-06-09 ) Jerusalem ,  Israel   Years active  1994 - present  Awards won   Golden Globe Awards   Best Supporting Actress - Motion Picture 2005   Closer   Other Awards   NBR Award for Best Cast 2004   Closer  Saturn Award for Best Actress (film) 2007   V for Vendetta       Natalie Portman (  Hebrew :  נטלי פורטמן  ‎; born  June 9,  1981 ) is a  Golden Globe-winning,  Academy Award -nominated  Israeli - American  actress .   Biography    Early life  Portman was born  Natalie Hershlag (  Hebrew :  נטלי הרשלג  ‎) in  Jerusalem ,  Israel . Her father, Avner Hershlag, is an Israeli doctor specializing in  fertility and reproduction ( reproductive endocrinology). Her mother, Shelley Stevens, is an American  homemaker who now works as her  agent. Portman's maternal ancestors were Jews from  Austria and  Russia and her paternal ancestors were Jews who immigrated to Israel from Poland and Romania. Her grandfather's parents died in  Auschwitz and her Romanian-born great-grandmother was a spy for the British during  World War II . Portman's parents met at a  Jewish  student centre at  Ohio State University where Portman's mother was selling tickets. Portman's father returned to Israel, but the two corresponded and were married when Portman's mother visited Israel a few years later. When Portman was three years old, the family moved from Israel to the  United States , where her father pursued his medical training. The family lived in  Washington, D.C. in 1984 where she attended  Charles E. Smith Jewish Day School, relocated to  Connecticut in 1988, and then settled permanently in  Syosset, New York in 1990. Portman has said that although she "really love[s] the States... my heart's in Jerusalem. That's where I feel at home". Portman is an only child and very close to her parents, who are often seen with her at her film premieres.   Education  Portman was a straight-A student."I'd rather be smart than be a movie star," she told an interviewer. Although she says her family was not religious, she attended a Jewish elementary school, the  Solomon Schechter Day School of  Glen Cove, New York. She graduated from a public high school,  Syosset High School. Portman reportedly skipped the premiere of  Star Wars: Episode I so she could study for her high school final exams. In June 2003, Portman graduated from  Harvard University with a bachelor's degree in psychology, and pursued graduate studies at the  Hebrew University of Jerusalem in the spring of 2004. At Harvard, Portman was  Alan Dershowitz's research assistant (he thanks her in   The Case for Israel ). She was also a research assistant in a psychology lab, and in March 2006, appeared as a guest lecturer at a  Columbia University course in terrorism and counterterrorism, where she spoke about her film  V for Vendetta . In addition to being bilingual in  Hebrew and  English , Portman has studied  French ,  Japanese,  German and  Arabic . As a student, Portman co-authored two research papers which were published in professional scientific journals. Her 1998 high school paper on the "Enzymatic Production of Hydrogen" was entered in the  Intel Science Talent Search. In 2002, she contributed to a study on memory called "Frontal Lobe Activation During Object Permanence" during her psychology studies at Harvard.   Career    Early career  Portman started dancing lessons at the age of four. She performed in local troupes, and dreamed of dancing on  Broadway. At the age of ten , Portman was discovered in a Long Island  pizza parlor by an agent for  Revlon, who offered her an opportunity to  model. She turned down the opportunity in favour of acting. In a magazine interview, Portman said: "I was definitely different from the other kids. I was more ambitious, I knew what I liked and what I wanted, and I worked very hard. I was a very serious kid." As a child, Portman spent her  school holidays attending theatre camps. When she was ten, she auditioned for  Ruthless! about a girl who is prepared to commit murder to get the lead in a school play. She was chosen as the understudy for  Britney Spears .In 1994, she auditioned for  Luc Besson's film   Léon (aka  The Professional ). She was initially turned down, but through further auditioning won the part. Soon after getting the part, she took "Portman", her grandmother's maiden name, as her stage name, in the interest of privacy; in the  Director's Cut of the film found on  DVD she is credited as Natalie Hershlag. In the film, Portman plays an orphaned girl who befriends a much older  assassin.  Léon opened on  November 18,  1994 , and marked her feature film debut at age 13. That same year she appeared in the short film   Developing , which aired on television. Starting at age thirteen, Portman spent her school holidays attending upscale theatre camps  Stagedoor Manor and Usdan Camp, where she fell in love with acting, playing roles in camp productions such as the title character in   Anne of Green Gables  , Dream Laurey in   Oklahoma! , and Hermia in   A Midsummer Night's Dream .   1995–1999  During the mid- 1990s, Portman had roles in the films   Heat ,   Everyone Says I Love You and   Mars Attacks! , as well as a major role in   Beautiful Girls . In 1997, Portman played the role of  Anne Frank in a  Broadway adaptation of   The Diary of Anne Frank . She initially turned down the lead role in the film   Anywhere But Here , after learning it would involve a  sex scene. Director  Wayne Wang and actress  Susan Sarandon demanded a rewrite of the script. Portman was shown a new draft, and she joined the project. The film opened in late 1999; she received a  Golden Globe nomination for  Best Supporting Actress for her role as Ann August. Critic Mary Elizabeth Williams of Salon commented on Portman's performance: "Sarandon is good, but Portman is astonishing. Unlike any number of actresses her age, she's neither too maudlin nor too plucky. Her Ann is both a petulant wet blanket and a thoughtful, painfully lonely girl fumbling to find herself. Portman knows her character is the soul of the story, and she isn't overreaching about it. She portrays Ann's angst quietly, using her wide, expressive face to convey little ripples of frustration and exasperation. She's the counterpoint to Sarandon's bravado, and she keeps the film from becoming a hammy, anything-you-can-cry-I-can-cry-harder diva fest."  In the late  1990s, Portman was cast as  Padmé Amidala in the   Star Wars prequel trilogy , and in early 1999,   Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace opened and became the highest grossing film of the year and the second highest grossing film out of the  Star Wars series. Its massive audience and mainstream appeal made Portman an instant star. Portman then signed on to play the lead role of a persevering teenaged mother in   Where the Heart Is .   2000–2005  After filming  Where the Heart Is , Portman moved into the dorms of  Harvard University to pursue her  bachelor's degree in  psychology . She said in a 1999 interview that, with the exception of the  Star Wars prequels, she would not act for the next four years in order to concentrate on studying. During the summer break, from June to September 2000, Portman filmed   Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones in  Sydney , including additional production in  London . In July 2001, Portman opened in  New York City's Public Theatre production of  Chekhov's   The Seagull  , directed by  Mike Nichols, playing the role of Nina alongside  Meryl Streep,  Kevin Kline, and  Philip Seymour Hoffman. The play opened at the  Delacorte Theatre in  Central Park. That same year, she was one of many celebrities who made  cameo appearances in the comedy   Zoolander . In 2002, the film opened around the world. Portman was cast in a small role in the film   Cold Mountain alongside  Jude Law and  Nicole Kidman. In 2004, Portman appeared in the independent movies   Garden State and   Closer .  Garden State was an official selection of the  Sundance Film Festival, and won Best First Feature at the  Independent Spirit Awards. Her performance as Alice in  Closer saw Portman win a Supporting Actress Golden Globe as well as a  Best Supporting Actress Oscar nomination. 2005 saw the worldwide release of the final  Star Wars prequel,   Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith on May 19. The film was the highest grossing film of the year, and was voted Favorite Motion Picture at the  People's Choice Awards. Shortly before the film's opening, Portman shaved her head for her role in the film adaptation of  Alan Moore's graphic novel,   V for Vendetta , released in March 2006. Her shaved head was first seen publicly at the  Revenge of the Sith premieres. "Making a dramatic change that isn't reversible is always a worthy experience," she said of the drastically different hairstyle, "and that sort of gave me the courage to do it." She kept her hair short for most of 2005, had a  fauxhawk, and briefly sported a full  mohawk in late August, saying that it was "kind of wonderful to throw vanity away for a bit". Also in 2005, Portman filmed   Free Zone and legendary director Milos Forman's   Goya's Ghosts . Forman hadn't seen any of her work, but thought she looked like a  Goya painting so he requested a meeting. During the filming of  Goya's Ghosts , she partied in Madrid with co-star  Javier Bardem, but was largely unrecognized due to her mohawk.   2006–present  Portman appeared on   Saturday Night Live on  March 4,  2006, hosting the show with musical guest  Fall Out Boy and special guest star  Dennis Haysbert. In a now-famous  SNL Digital Short, she portrays herself as an angry  gangsta rapper (with  Andy Samberg as her  Flava Flav-esque partner in  Viking garb) during a faux-interview with  Chris Parnell, saying she cheated at Harvard University while high on  pot and  cocaine. In another sketch, she portrays a student named Rebecca Hershlag (her actual surname) attending a  Bar Mitzvah, and in an installment of the recurring sketch The Needlers (also known as Sally and Dan, The Couple That Should Be Divorced), plays a fertility specialist (her father's profession).      Portman promoting   V for Vendetta at Comic Con 2005.    V for Vendetta opened in early 2006. Portman portrayed  Evey Hammond, a young woman who is saved from the secret police by the main character,  V. Portman worked with a voice coach for the role, learning to speak in an  English accent, and had her head shaved.   Maxim magazine named Portman #33 on its annual  Hot 100 list, citing her  V for Vendetta hairstyle as a huge accomplishment proving "you don't need hair to be hot." Portman has commented on  V for Vendetta' s political relevance, and mentioned that her character, who joins an underground anti-government group, is "often bad and does things that you don't like" and that "Being from Israel was a reason I wanted to do this because  terrorism and violence are such a daily part of my conversations since I was little." She said the film "doesn't make clear good or bad statements. It respects the audience enough to take away their own opinion". Both   Goya's Ghosts and   Free Zone received limited releases in 2006. Portman starred in the children's film   Mr. Magorium's Wonder Emporium , which began filming in April 2006 and was released in November 2007; she has said that she was "excited to do a kids' movie." In late 2006, Portman filmed   The Other Boleyn Girl , a historical drama in which she plays  Anne Boleyn;  Eric Bana and  Scarlett Johansson will co-star in the film. She was also named one of the hottest women of film and TV, by   Blender Magazine. Filmed and screened in 2006 was  Wong Kar-wai's road movie   My Blueberry Nights . Portman won acclaim for her role as gambler Leslie: It's not until Portman shows up that you'll find the sort of sizzle and sympathy Wong cooks up with ease in his best films. Natalie Portman — Best Actress? Yup. For once she's not playing a waif or a child princess but a mature, full-bodied woman, probably a decade older than Portman is (25). She looks great, in a blond rinse and come-hither outfits, but she's not coasting on her looks; they are only accoutrements to Leslie's natural salesmanship. She uses her appeal to simultaneously flirt with and taunt the gambler across the table....But the memory we'll cherish is that of Portman's vibrancy, grittiness and ache, all performed with a virtuosa's easy assurance. She, not Jones, is the savory dish of movie magic in a mostly bland  Blueberry Nights .  Portman had a small role in the 18th season of   The Simpsons  as the voice of  Bart Simpson's love interest, Darcy, from a neighboring town. She also appears in  Paul McCartney 's music video " Dance Tonight" from his 2007 album " Memory Almost Full" directed by  Michel Gondry. Portman also has a cameo in the  Wes Anderson film   The Darjeeling Limited opposite  Jason Schwartzman, and will star opposite  Tobey Maguire and  Jake Gyllenhaal in the drama film  Brothers , a remake of the 2004 Danish film of  the same name.   Activism    Animal rights  Portman has been a  vegetarian since childhood and is an advocate for  animal rights . She does not eat animal products or wear  fur,  feathers or  leather. "All of my shoes are from  Target and  Stella McCartney," she says. In 2007, Natalie Portman traveled to Rwanda with Jack Hanna, to film a documentary titled  Gorillas on the Brink . Later at a naming ceremony, Portman named a baby gorilla Gukina, which means 'to play'.  In 2007, she launched her own brand of vegan footwear.   Public image  A number of songs and albums have been named in her honour, by artists such as Intel One,  Team Sleep,  Sage Francis, and  Ozma. The make-up brand  Stila has a lip colour named after her (a sheer plum titled "Natalie"), fashion designer  Zac Posen has referred to her as his " muse" and writer  Kia Abdullah names Portman as the woman she would like to be. Portman is among a very small number of professional actors with a defined  Erdős–Bacon number.   Personal life  Portman has had romantic links with actors including  Gael Garcia Bernal and  Jake Gyllenhaal . In the May 2002 issue of   Vogue Portman called actor/musician  Lukas Haas and musician  Moby her close friends. She was linked to  Maroon 5 frontman  Adam Levine, but he claims they are friends. She reportedly dated  Nat Rothschild, of the famous multi-billionaire banking family. Recently, she was spotted with former male model  Nathan Bogle at the U.S. Open on  September 5,  2007. When asked in a June 2002   Rolling Stone interview whether she "ever wondered, growing up, whether [she was] gay," she said: "Sure. I've never dated a woman or anything like that. But ... I think it's much more the person that you fall in love with — and why would you close yourself off to fifty percent of the people? ... I think my personality is more compatible with men than women."   Beliefs  Portman has been an advocate of  environmental causes since the age of twelve, when she joined an environmental song and dance troupe. She has been a  vegetarian since the age of eight, and at some point went further and became  vegan. Portman has spent some of her free time involved in causes such as the  Democrats'  2004 U.S. presidential campaign and ending poverty. In 2004 and 2005 she traveled to  Uganda ,  Guatemala , and  Ecuador as the Ambassador of Hope for  FINCA International, an organization that promotes  micro-lending to help finance women-owned businesses in poor countries. In an interview conducted backstage at the  Live 8 concert in  Philadelphia and appearing on the  PBS program   Foreign Exchange with Fareed Zakaria she discussed  microfinance. Host  Fareed Zakaria said that he was "generally wary of celebrities with fashionable causes", but included the segment with Portman because "she really knew her stuff". In the "Voices" segment of the April 29th, 2007 episode of the ABC Sunday Morning Program   This Week with George Stephanopoulos , Portman discussed her work with FINCA and how it can benefit women and their children in third world countries. In the Fall of 2007, Portman visited several university campuses, including Harvard, UCLA, UC Berkeley, Stanford, Princeton, New York University, and Columbia, to inspire students with the power of microfinance and to encourage them to join the  Village Banking Campaign to help families and communities lift themselves out of poverty. On the concept of the  afterlife, she comments "I don't believe in that. I believe this is it, and I believe it's the best way to live." She has said that she feels more Jewish in the Holy Land and that she would like to raise her children in the Jewish religion: "A priority for me is definitely that I'd like to raise my kids Jewish, but the ultimate thing is to have someone who is a good person and who is a partner... I get much more Jewish in Israel".   Controversy  Portman, who had read  W.E.B. Du Bois, was interviewed for the August 2004 issue of   Allure magazine where she was quoted as saying, "Oh my God! I'm not black, but I know what it feels like!" She then wrote a letter to their editor, in which she wrote: "The 'it' I was referring to when I said, 'I know what it feels like,' was not intended to signify that I know 'how black people feel,' but rather that I know what DuBois’ concept of double-consciousness feels like, in variation. Had my quote included what I actually said preceding that statement, perhaps my meaning would have been clearer." Portman also made headlines when she was moved away by  Israeli Police on  February 23,  2005 from  Jerusalem 's  Western Wall after protests by religious Jews who were praying at the holy site. She and Israeli actor  Aki Avni were filming a kissing scene near the  Western Wall for the movie   Free Zone . This was deemed to be "immodest" and men who were praying heckled the pair until police stepped in and suggested they return later. The site is under the authority of  Orthodox Judaism, and Rabbi Shmuel Rabinovitch, who is responsible for the site, said the actors' behaviour violated the code of conduct. It was reported that on  July 8,  2005, Portman was pulled over by the  NYPD while driving in a transit tunnel underneath  New York City for looking unusual and having an expired registration. She had a shaven head from playing her role in  V for Vendetta , and had just arrived back in the  United States from Israel and film shooting in Berlin. The policeman told her not to drive in the tunnel, but to take the bridge instead. "I've never had that happen to me before," Portman said. "It's supposedly random... I didn't understand that logic. If you're a suspect, don't take the tunnel, take the bridge?"   Filmography    Film/Television  Year Title Role Notes  1994  Léon (aka  The Professional ) Mathilda   1995  Heat  Lauren Gustafson   1996  Beautiful Girls  Marty    Mars Attacks!  Taffy Dale    Everyone Says I Love You  Laura Dandridge   1999  Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace   Padmé Amidala    Anywhere But Here  Ann August   2000  Where the Heart Is  Novalee Nation   2001  Zoolander  (Herself) cameo  2002  Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones   Padmé Amidala   2003  Cold Mountain  Sara   2004  Garden State  Samantha    Closer  Alice Ayres/Jane Jones For  Closer , she received a  Golden Globe, and was nominated for an  Oscar and a  BAFTA Award.  2005  Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith   Padmé Amidala    Free Zone  Rebecca received a limited U.S.theatrical release in April 2006  2006  V for Vendetta   Evey Hammond    Paris, je t'aime  Francine    Goya's Ghosts  Ines/Alicia   2007  My Blueberry Nights  Leslie    The Darjeeling Limited  Jack's Ex-Girlfriend    Hotel Chevalier  Jack's Ex-Girlfriend 13-minute short companion piece to   The Darjeeling Limited    Mr. Magorium's Wonder Emporium  Molly Mahoney   2008  The Other Boleyn Girl   Anne Boleyn completed  2009 Brothers   filming     Theatre  Ruthless!! (1994)   The Diary of Anne Frank (1999)  The Seagull  (2001)   Awards    Won  2002 -  Teen Choice Awards, Choice Movie Actress: Drama/Action Adventure:   Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones  2005 -  Golden Globe Awards, Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture:   Closer  2005 -  National Board of Review Awards, Best Acting by an Ensemble:   Closer (shared with  Clive Owen,  Julia Roberts, and  Jude Law) 2005 -  San Diego Film Critics Society Awards, Best Supporting Actress:   Closer  2007 -  The Constellation Awards, Best Female Performance in a 2006 Science Fiction Film, TV Movie, or Mini-Series:   V for Vendetta  2007 -  Saturn Awards, Best Actress:   V for Vendetta    Nominations  2000 -  Golden Globe Awards, Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture:   Anywhere But Here  2000 -  Teen Choice Awards, Choice Movie Actress:   Where the Heart Is  2000 -  Saturn Awards, Best Young Actress:   Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace  2003 -  Saturn Awards, Best Actress:   Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones  2005 -  Academy Awards , Best Supporting Actress:   Closer  2005 -  BAFTA Awards, Best Supporting Actress:   Closer  2005 -  Satellite Awards, Best Supporting Actress, Drama:   Closer  2005 -  Teen Choice Awards, Choice Movie Actress: Drama:   Closer ,   Garden State ; Choice Movie Actress: Action/Adventure:   Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith ; Choice Movie Liar,   Garden State ; Choice Movie Liplock:   Garden State ; Choice Movie Love Scene:   Garden State  2005 -  MTV Movie Awards, Best Female Performance:   Garden State ; Best Kiss:   Garden State  2005 -  Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards, Best Supporting Actress:   Closer ; Best Acting Ensemble:   Closer  2006 -  Teen Choice Awards, Choice Movie Actress: Drama/Action Adventure:   V for Vendetta  2007 -  Saturn Awards, Best Actress:   Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith  Retrieved from " http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natalie_Portman"      The Schools Wikipedia is  sponsored by SOS Children , and consists of a hand selection from the English Wikipedia articles with only minor deletions (see www.wikipedia.org for details of authors and sources). The articles are available under the   GNU Free Documentation License  . See also our   Disclaimer  . This article was sourced from http://en.wikipedia.org/?oldid=182487374 .    
