 Florida Blind Services

 Skip Navigation    Navigation Menu     Home > Index   Search:        Main Menu About Blind Services  Community Rehabilitation Programs  Contact Blind Services  Florida Rehabilitation Council for the Blind  Frequently Asked Questions  Resources  Site Map   Programs and Services Blind Babies Program  Business Enterprise  Children's Program  Employer Services  Independent Living  Transition Services  Talking Books Library  Rehabilitation Center  Vocational Rehabilitation      Florida Blind Services Welcome to the Florida Division of Blind Services. Mission Statement: To ensure blind and visually impaired Floridians have the tools, support and opportunity to achieve success. Vision Statement: In partnership with others, create a barrier free environment in the lives of Floridians with visual disabilities. Overview of Services Blind Babies Program The  Blind Babies Program provides community-based early-intervention education to children from birth to five years of age who are blind or visually impaired, and to their parents, families, and through community-based provider organizations. Children's Program The  Children's Program serves children who are blind from five years of age through transition to the Vocational Rehabilitation Program. This program supplements services already offered by the school system to foster the child's learning and ability to function independently. The child's parents, guardian, and family members should be an integral part of the program in order to foster independence. Transition Program  The goal of the  Transition Program is to assist young people in meeting their future employment goals through transitioning from school to work or from school to a higher educational program.  Students must have a visual impairment in both eyes and require vocational rehabilitation services to prepare for employment. Transition services are generally provided through the Vocational Rehabilitation Program. However, they could also be provided through the Children's Program. In either case, the student will have a Plan of Services. The types of services to be provided through Blind Services are normally incorporated into the student's Individual Education Plan as well. The final goal is to ensure that your child can be an independent adult. Independent Living Services Independent Living Services are provided to enable individuals who are blind or severely visually impaired to live more independently in their homes and communities with a maximum degree of self-direction. Successful outcomes enable individuals to live more independently in their community and/or transition to the working world. Vocational Rehabilitation Services Vocational Rehabilitation Services are provided to assist blind and visually impaired individuals seeking employment.  Qualified individuals must have a bilateral visual impairment which constitutes or results in a substantial impediment to employment and needs services to prepare for, enter, engage in, or retain gainful employment. Successful outcomes lead to achievement of employment goals. Employer Services Information services are provided to  employers who need to know how to make a job accessible to an employee with a visual impairment.  Employers seeking to hire a qualified employee can also contact us for this information as well. Business Enterprise Services The  Business Enterprise Program provides job opportunities in the food service sector for eligible blind persons under the Randolph-Sheppard Act. Job opportunities include: Snack Bar, Cafeteria, Highway Vending Machines, or Non-Highway Vending. The Rehabilitation Center for the Blind and Visually Impaired  The  Rehabilitation Center for the Blind and Visually Impaired is a place where people who are blind can reside temporarily while they learn to lead productive, self-sufficient lives.  The Rehabilitation Center program incorporates instruction in a variety of independence skills, as well as counseling, including home management, cooking, cleaning, personal care, labeling, orientation and mobility, Braille, access computer technology, home repairs, adaptation to blindness and many other skills that contribute to independence and the confidence to seek the highest level of employment possible. Braille and Talking Books Library The Florida Division of Blind Services also provides information and reading materials needed by individuals residing in Florida who are unable to use standard print because of a visual, physical, or reading disability. These services are provided through its  Bureau of Braille and Talking Books Library .   The Blind and Visually Impaired Ring Powered By Ringsurf        Top  For questions and comments related to services:  Contact Information  For issues regarding this website email Keith Flowers:  Web Administrator   Disclaimer  Privacy  Accessibility  My Florida  Florida Department of Education  Copyright Statement   Free Downloads: Acrobat Reader  Adobe Converter   Last modified: October 24 2011    tracking code  
