 Pascual Martínez Forteza, clarinet. New York Philharmonic Orchestra. Web Oficial

      GEMA NIETO-FORTEZA, PIANO "She has a brilliant technique that together with her extreme sensibility, gives her an outstanding quality among her generation. She brings this out with a very high artistic level",  Brenno Ambrosini, March 2003. Spanish pianist Gema Nieto has established herself as a performer of musical sensibility, providing intellect which brings new light to the works she performs. Nieto's awards include Cum Laude with Honors at the Castellón Conservatory of Music, Spain, in her Piano Masters' Degree in 2002. After that, she moved to NY where she graduated on Masters Degree at the Manhattan School of Music. A Fulbright felowship since 2003, she obtained a scholarship from The International Institute and the Commission of Cultural, Educational and Scientific Exchange between Spain and United States (Ruth Lee Kennedy Scholarship). Teachers as Mauricio Vallina, Brenno Ambrosini, Dr. Solomon Mikowsky and Dr. Donn-Alexandre Feder were part of her artistic-pianistic development, Dr. David Gilbert in her Conducting Orchestra Studies, Gerald Robbins and David Krakauer in her chamber music ensembles coachings. As a soloist, she has appeared at several International Music Festivals including the International Music Festival of Tenerife, Spain; Puigcerdá International Piano Festival, Spain; Chamber Music Series'04, NY; "Skethes of Spain" Series at the Carnegie Hall , NY; and Changchun International Music Festival, China. At the age of 21 she was invited from the Conde Duque Hall, Madrid, to be part of the "Jóvenes Intérpretes'99 " ("Young Artist Series'99"), doing her Solo Piano Recital Debut. As a chamber interpreter, Nieto started in 2003 to play together with Pascual Martinez Forteza (clarinetist of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra). They already played in Carnegie Hall, and made their Asian debut on 2004, being guest artist in the Prestigious International Festival of Clarinet in Changchun, China. Also she has played in chamber groups with other musicians from the New York Philharmonic: horn player Philip Myers, flutists Mindy Kaufman and Robert Langevin, oboist Robert Botti,, and bassoonist Kim Laskowski. As a music promoter and Artist Manager, Gema Nieto has made collaborations with the Spanish Consulate in NY, Hispanic Sociaety of America and other organizations. She is currently promoting her "Sketches of Spain" Project, organizing concerts of Spanish Music performed by Spanish musicians, in Music Halls like Carnegie Hall. Last year 2005, she gave birth to the 1st Benifaio Music Festival: A music Festival in Spain with special collaboration of musicians from the New York Philharmonic.             
