 Global Climate Change Links

   Subject Areas  Carbon Cycle  Climate  Coastal Sensitivity to Sea Level Rise  Energy and Socioeconomic Systems  Land-Use and Ecosystems  Oceanic Trace Gases  Solar and Atmospheric Radiation  Trace Gas Emissions  Vegetation Response to CO 2 and Climate  Fossil-Fuel CO 2 Emissions  Atmospheric Trace Gas Measurements  Terrestrial Carbon Management   Global Climate Change Links This page provides links to web pages that we at CDIAC feel do a responsible job of presenting information and discussion pertinent to the  science behind the global climate change ("global warming") debate. These sites include those on both sides of the debate; some asserting that global warming is a clear and present danger, and others that might be labeled global warming "skeptics." Some of these sites don't take a position per se; they exist to offer the public objective scientific information and results on our present understanding of the climate system. The list is not intended to be comprehensive, by any means. We hope it will be especially helpful for those who may be just beginning their research into global climate change issues. These links will take you outside of CDIAC's web server. Many will lead you to other valuable links pages. Please feel free to email  Dale Kaiser at CDIAC regarding any broken links  on this page , or with the addresses of quality links you think might improve this list (although we intend to keep the list manageable in size). Thank you. National and International Programs Atmosphere, Climate & Environment Information Programme (Disseminates information, effects of, and controls on air pollution and climate change, within the framework of national legislation and international discussion.)   Carbon Sequestration Web site (Offers information on carbon management efforts supported by the DOE Office of Science.)   Climate Change Information Kit (Detailed summary of climate change issues from the United Nations Environment Programme's Information Unit for Conventions.)   Climate Prediction Center at NOAA's National Centers for Environmental Prediction (The Center's mission is to maintain a continuous watch on short-term climate fluctuations and to diagnose and predict them.)   Climate Research Division in the United Kingdom (Comprehensive climate links for the UK Meteorological Office's Hadley Center for Climate Prediction and Research.)   Climate Resources page of NOAA's National Climatic Data Center (Expert and authoritative source for many types of climate data and documentation.)   Common Questions About Climate Change (Compiled by the United Nations Environment Programme and the World Meteorological Organization.)   Encyclopedia of Sustainable Development (A one-stop source of information on sustainable development.)   Encyclopedia of the Atmospheric Environment (A one-stop source of information on a range of atmospheric issues, including air quality, acid rain, global warming and ozone depletionsustainable development.) Environment Canada's Global Climate Change Site (Informative and entertaining site; especially good for educators and students.)   Global Change Data and Information Service (A collection of distributed information systems operated by agencies participating in the U.S. Global Change Research Program.)   GREENGRASS (Offers information on sources and sinks of greenhouse gases from managed European grasslands and mitigation strategies.)   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (The IPCC was formed by the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme in 1988 and is the vehicle through which scientists around the world are working jointly on climate change assessments.)   NASA's Land Cover Land Use Change Program (An interdisciplinary programme aimed at improving the understanding of land use and land cover change dynamics and their relationships with global environmental change.)   NOAA-CIRES Climate Diagnostics Center (Focuses on advancing our understanding of and ability to predict climate variability. A great ENSO site.)   Regional and Global Data for Global Change Research from ORNL DAAC (Comprehensive metadata database of data and models on the biogeochemical dynamics of terrestrial ecosystems. Metadata contain links to data and models held by other data centers.)   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Climate Change Site (EPA's site describes the climate system, climate change impacts, and actions being taken from the global level down to the local level.)   U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) (Umbrella agency site covers anything having to do with U.S. government climate change research. A great source for 100s of additional links.)   World Bank Group (Provides loans, policy advice, technical assistance, and knowledge-sharing services in assistance to developing economies.)   World Data Centre for Greenhouse Gases (Collects, archives, and provides greenhouse gas data and data from related gases in the atmosphere and ocean that are measured under the Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) programme.)    Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) Actionbioscience.org (Organization whose goal is the promotion of public literacy in the biosciences.)   CO 2 Science (Non-Profit Organization Specializing in Research and Educational Developments Related to the Rising CO 2 Content of Earth's Atmosphere.)   Climate Ark (Climate Change Portal and Internet Search Tool that provides access to reviewed climate change and renewable energy news and information.)   Climate Action Network Europe (CNE) (European focal point of the global Climate Action Network which focuses on European climate change issues.)   EarthTrends: The Environmental Information Portal (EarthTrends is an online source for timely, accurate, and relevant environmental and sustainable development information. The site contains something for everyone: policy-makers in government and private industry, NGOs, educators, students, and the general public.)   Global Forest Watch (International data and mapping network that combines on-the-ground knowledge with digital technology to provide accurate information about the world's forests.)   Global Warming: Understanding the Forecast (Teachers' Resource Manual produced by the Environmental Defense Fund and the American Museum of Natural History.)   George C. Marshall Institute (Nonprofit corporation that conducts technical assessments of scientific issues having an impact on public policy.)   Internet Scout Project (Weekly current awareness publication highlighting only the most useful new and newly discovered online resources.)   Intute (Gateway to quality evaluated Internet resources in the natural world, coordinated by The Natural History Museum, London.    Newsletters  World Climate Report  (Thought provoking biweekly summary. Lead writer and editor: Dr. Patrick J. Michaels, University of Virginia.)    Articles of Interest Global Warming: State of the Science (Dr. Alan Robock's (Univ. of Maryland) 1997 testimony before the U.S. House of Representatives' Science Committee on Global Warming.)   The Great Climate Flip Flop (William H. Calvin's article from The Atlantic Monthly , January 1998.)   The Little Ice Age: When Global Cooling Gripped the World (Alan Cutler's  Washington Post article, August 1997.)   Measuring the Temperature of Earth from Space (NASA's Dr. Roy Spencer discusses the effect of corrections applied to Microwave Sounding Unit data. From NASA's  Space Science News , August 1998.)   Science Briefs articles from NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS)  (Since the mid 1990s, GISS scientists have prepared short articles about their research with the aim of briefly communicating to the public the relevance and even the excitement of our research. These summaries are shorn of most technical language and may be thought of as "popular science" discussions.)    CDIAC Reference Tools      CDIAC reports data in units of carbon   |   Home   |   ORNL   |   Security Notice   |   Webmaster      Home  About CDIAC  FAQ  What's New?  CDIAC Publications  Products  AmeriFlux Network  Ocean CO 2   FACE  HIPPO  NARSTO  Search CDIAC  Data Submission  Staff  Contact Us   Find :        
