 David Irving

             Irving challenges Goldhagen      Irving refused Aussie visa again         Controversial British historian David Irving has     been refused entry into Australia for a third time    17 January 2003     news.ninemsn.com.au/World/story_13047.asp?MSID=0312e15ab0994f9484b     Irving, whose theories denying that the holocaust happened have caused    outrage among Jewish communities and historians worldwide, received    his refusal notice from the Australian government last week, a year    after applying for a tourist visa.       He was previously refused entry in 1993 and 1996.       Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock rejected Irving's application for    a visa after he failed the character test.       Irving, whose daughter Beatrice is an Australian citizen living in    Brisbane, said he had engaged a Perth firm of solicitors to fight his    refusal, even though the government said he could not appeal.      "Thousands of Australians want to hear me speak,    they have been denied that right," Irving said on Friday.       "Arsonists are allowed to visit. Weirdos and whackos with real    criminal records are allowed to visit but someone with an artificial    criminal record is not allowed.       "My criminal record is artificial. The law I broke in Germany doesn't    exist anywhere else in the world."       In its decision, the Australian High Commission in London said it    could not be assumed Irving would abide by Australian law.       "Mr Irving's behaviour demonstrates a defiance and contempt for the    laws of some of the countries he visited," it wrote in its report.       "His conduct was deemed serious enough by those countries to see him    deported and excluded.       "It is difficult to determine that Mr Irving wouldn't behave similarly    whilst in Australia."       Irving was convicted in Germany in 1992 for defaming the memory of the    dead and was expelled from the country the following year.       He was also deported from Canada in 1992 for lying to an Immigration    Adjudicator and in 1994, a British High Court judge found he gave    false evidence.       He also owes the Australian government $35,140 after previous failed    appeals.      Top of Page   |    Home Page   ©-free 2002 Adelaide Institute     
