 Morgan Freeman Pictures, Bio and Links

 Morgan Freeman    Go to:  Main Page |  Actors |  Actresses |  Singers  Morgan Freeman Bio  Morgan Freeman Pictures     Morgan Freeman  Age:  74 Height:  6' 2½" Birth place:  Memphis, Tennessee, U.S.   Morgan Porterfield Freeman, Jr. (born June 1, 1937) is an American actor, film director, and narrator. He is noted for his reserved demeanor and authoritative speaking voice. Freeman has received Academy Award nominations for his performances in Street Smart, Driving Miss Daisy, The Shawshank Redemption and Invictus and won in 2005 for Million Dollar Baby. He has also won a Golden Globe Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award. Freeman has appeared in many other box office hits, including Unforgiven, Glory, Se -  en.wikipedia.org   Actor, director, narrator.  Morgan Freeman was born on June 1, 1937 in Memphis, Tennessee. The youngest of five children born to barber Morgan Porterfield Freeman, Sr. and schoolteacher Mayme Edna, Freeman was raised in Chicago and Mississippi in a low-income home. Not long after he was born, Morgan's parents, like so many other African-Americans struggling under the pressures of the Jim Crow south, relocated to Chicago to find work. While his parents looked for jobs, Freeman remained with his maternal grand -  www.biography.com   With an authoritative voice and calm demeanour, this ever popular African American actor has grown into one of the most respected figures in modern US cinema. Born in June 1937 in Memphis, Tennessee, the young Freeman attended Los Angeles Community College before serving several years in the US Air Force as a mechanic between 1955 and 1959. His first dramatic arts exposure was on the stage and he appeared in an off-Broadway production of "The Nigger Lovers" and also in an all-African American production of -  www.imdb.com   Freeman is an entertainer. I guess he is good at it. I try and judge a person by their actions not by their speech. Freeman is a supporter of PEBHO. Since Freeman claims to be color blind it must of been all of that Hope and Change that hooked him. Can't fault him for that. Poor guy wanted a change from having to drive that old woman Daisy around town. -  boortz.com      Morgan Freeman Last 10 Films Born To Be Wild  Red  For Love of Liberty: The Story of America's Black Patriots  30 for 30: The 16th Man  Invictus  The Code  Prom Night in Mississippi  The Dark Knight  Wanted  The Maiden Heist    Disclaimer  Contact us  Advertise  Celebrity Links     
