 China's Three Gorges Dam Environmental Impact

   China's Three Gorges Dam            home   history  benefits  environmental impact  social consequences  current status  resources   contact    Is the Three Gorges Dam really a clean, renewable energy source?    Government says:  "Geological disasters in this area have been effectively controlled" (Wang Xiaofeng, deputy director of Three Gorges Project Construction Committe). [1]    Critics say:  "They're not truthfully reflecting a serious situation. The government is not being responsible to business or to China" (Chinese writer Dai Qing).  [1]    Documents and news reports released by the Chinese government are consistently more positive than those from environmental activists and news reporters from abroad. Click here for " Full Views of Three Gorges Project" by People’s Daily Online         Critics had long warned of the potential environmental damage that would result from such an extensive construction project. Some say that hydroelectric power should not be considered as arenewable energy source because of the irreversible environmental damage that result from these projects.    Greenhouse Gases : The main environmental benefit of the Three Gorges Dam is the reduction of carbon emissions. However, it has been found that the dam does cause greenhouse gases to be released into the atmosphere, just not in the form of industrial pollution. In reservoirs, the breakdown of vegetation and organic material that accumulates actually releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere! Therefore, while proponents claim that hydroelectric energy is a “clean” energy source, this is not entirely the case.     Water Pollution : Vegetation is not the only thing that will accumulate behind the dam. The dam has blocked approximately ten million tons of plastic bags, bottles, animal corpses, trees, and other detritus that would have otherwise have flowed out to sea. The Yangtze River is already one of the most polluted rivers in the world. Because of it’s proximity to several city centers, the dumping of industrial wast Enter away message text here. e and sewage has always been a serious problem. More than 265 billion gallons of raw sewage are dumped into the Yangtze annually. In addition, the reservoir itself flooded 1,600 abandoned factories, mines, dumps, and potential toxic waste sites. Because the dam prevents any of this material to be washed out to see, water quality in the Yangtze has become much worse since construction of the dam began.  This project claims to yield social benefits: less air pollution will result in better health and a higher standard of living. But in reality, millions of residents of the Three Gorges Dam area rely on the Yangtze River as their only water source. In Fengdu County alone, which lies on a tributary of the Yangtze River, contaminated water affects the lives of 50,000 people.  Siltation:  Because of reduced water speed behind the dam, an estimated 530 million tons of silt will accumulate behind the dam. Critics claim that the spillway built into the dam, with a discharge capacity of 116,000 cubic meters, is still not of sufficient size to prevent siltation from occurring behind the dam.  The rising silt levels could eventually cause sections of the Yangtze to be impassible for shipping, which will impact Chongqing, which relies on Yantze River trade for economic vitality. Silt accumulation could even block the sluice gates that are essential to control water levels behind the dam. In the event of heavy rainfall, rather than working to control the waters, the dam could actually cause more flooding to occur upstream. In addition, the reduced water speed will hinder the power generating capacity of the hydroelectric dam and contribute to accumulation of pollutants and toxins in water, reducing fresh water availability.  Ecosys tem Disruption   :   The giant hydroelectric dam serves as a physical barrier that disrupts the river ecosystem. In addition to water pollution, habitat fragmentation will have a detrimental affect on all species within the Three Gorges Dam area. In an environmental impact assessment, it was determined that there are 47 endangered species in the Three Gorges Dam area that are supposed to be protected by law. Two of the most popular marine animals in China, the Chinese River Dolphin and the Chinese Sturgeon are included in the list of species at risk. Ecosystem disruption poses not only environmental problems, but economic problems as well. The physical barrier interferes with fish spawning, and in combination with pollution, the dam will have a serious impact on the fishing economy of the Yangtze River.    Fisherman at the Three Gorges Dam Deforestation:  Deforestation is another factor that refutes China’s claim that the Three Gorges Dam is a “clean” energy source. Forests are a major carbon sink and work to negate greenhouse gas accum  ulation in the atmosphere. However, the process of deforestation (burning trees) actually emits carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, and is responsible for 20% of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions.  An immense amount of deforestation occurred for the construction of this project, mainly to provide farmland in the surrounding areas for those whose homes and farms were flooded by the reservoir. Much of this land is located on the steep slopes of the gorges, and has been determined as unsuitable land for farming. In addition, the three gorges dam area is geographically unstable, and deforestation has increased the risk of landslides. Because of this, residents are being forced to relocate for a second time.   Landslides:  The most current environmental concern with the Three Gorges Dam is the prevalence of landslides. So far there have been 91 places where the shore has collapsed, with a total of 36 kilometers of land caved in. Some of these landslides have triggered 50 meter-high waves on the reservoir behind the dam. In Fengjie County alone, officials have designated more than 800 disaster-prone areas. The potential for geological disaster is threatening the lives of millions of residents in the area. Large dams increase the possibility for earthquakes because of increasing geological pressure from rising water. Over 360 million people live within the watershed of the Yangtze River. In the chance of earthquake or dam collapse, millions of people who live downstream will be endangered.  Landslides have resulted from a culmination of factors. The Three Gorges area has been always been geologically unstable before construction on the dam began. When relocation began, many people were moved to higher land in the valley just above the flood line. Farmers cleared land to plant crops or orange trees, but deforestation contributed to soil erosion and destabilized many hillsides. Construction crews are now reinforcing the hillsides with concrete to prevent more landslides. Some residents have received aid from the government, but most are camping out in tents nearby for lack of money and transportation to be relocated. Most residents are farmers and fishermen who were forced to leave their villages for higher land and put their life savings into these new homes that were not built on reliable land.  Click here for the latest news report on landslides   Landslides on the Yangtze River         
