 Traditional Saudi dress/clothing - SAMIRAD (Saudi Arabia Market Information Resource)

 Traditional Saudi dress/clothing MALE DRESS THOBE: The traditional clothing for men is the Thobe, a loose, long-sleeved, ankle-length garment. Thobes worn in summer are generally white and made of cotton. Thobes worn in winter are generally darker in color and made of wool. TAGIYAH: The Tagiyah is a white knitted skull cap GHUTRA: The Ghutra is a square scarf, made of cotton or silk, which is worn folded across the head over the Tagiyah. The end of the scarf can be draped across the face as protection in the event of sandstorms. AGAL: The Agal is a thick, doubled, black cord which is worn on top of the Ghutra to hold it in place. FEMALE DRESS THOBE: Women wear the Thobe - a loose, long-sleeved, ankle-length garment, but, for women, the neck and front can be embroidered and decorated with beads. ABAYA: The Abaya is a large, black cloak, worn either loose and flowing or wrapped around the body. The Abaya is generally made of silk or synthetic cloth. BOSHIYA: The Boshiya is a black veil, light in weight, worn across the lower part of the face. SURWAL: The Surwal are cotton or silk trousers worn by women under the Thobe.  Related Items  Main reference point:  General Information   Map  Gallery  Index  External Links  Issues          Home       Country Profile       Directory       Current News       Notice Board       Contact       To Advertise    Search:       Profile of Saudi Arabia Latest News  Saudi Press Agency  Fact File  Cities  Islam  History  Kings  Judicial System  Government  Economy  Agriculture  Communications  Electricity  Industry  Oil  Transport  Social Development  Art and Culture  Aid  Foreign Relations  General Information  Addresses  Bibliography  Statistics  Books  Links    The Country Profile contains thousands of pages of information on every aspect of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, including its geography, history and development (political, economic and social).  RSS News Reader URL is here:                    
