 Map Gallery of Ethnic Groups in the United States

 A merican  E thnic  G eography  A C ultural  G eography of the  U nited  S tates and  C anada   Map Gallery of Ethnic Groups in the United States   The 2000 Census provides the latest information about the many ethnic and ancestry groups in the United States. The following series of county-level choropleth maps, which reveals the distribution of many of these groups, draws on this resource. The maps are in PDF format and require the free  Adobe Reader to view.     To access the data source for these maps, visit the Census Bureau's  American FactFinder site. On this site, you can produce your own ethnic group maps or produce downloadable tables.    Leading Group by County Leading Minority Group by County       Absence of American Indians       Absence of Blacks       Absence of Asians       Absence of Hispanics       Absence of Minorities  Percent American Indian       American Indian and White       American Indian and Black  Percent Black or African American  Percent Asian  Percent Chinese  Percent Filipino  Percent Asian Indian  Percent Vietnamese  Percent Korean  Percent Japanese  Percent Hispanic  Percent Mexican  Percent Puerto Rican  Percent Cuban  Percent Irish   Percent Scots-Irish Percent Scottish  Percent French  Percent French Canadian  Percent Cajun  Percent Dutch  Percent German  Percent Pennsylvania German  Percent Scandinavian  Percent Norwegian  Percent Swedish  Percent Danish  Percent Icelandic  Percent Finnish  Percent Italian  Percent Greek  Percent Hungarian  Percent Polish  Percent Russian  Percent Czech  Percent Ukrainian  Percent Arab  Percent Lebanese      The Census Bureau has also prepared a series of briefs on the major groups, as well as overviews of ancestry and the foreign-born population. These are also in PDF format. Each includes national-level summaries of population totals and distributions, including both detailed tables and maps. Ancestry: 2000 The Foreign-Born Population: 2000  The American Indian and Alaska Native Population: 2000  The Black Population: 2000  The Hispanic Population  The Asian Population: 2000       AEG Home Page |  Schedule |  Assignments |  Policies  VU GeoMet Home Page |  VU Home Page  Created by JTK. Last revised August 25, 2004. 
